Political 
and 
Economic 
Implications 
of 
Blockchain 
Technology 
in 
Business 
and 
Healthcare 


Dário de Oliveira RodriguesInstituto Politécnico de Santarém, Portugal 



A volume in the Advances in Data Mining and 
Database Management (ADMDM) Book Series 


Published in the United States of America by 
IGI Global 
Business Science Reference (an imprint of IGI Global) 
701 E. Chocolate Avenue 
Hershey PA, USA 17033 
Tel: 717-533-8845 
Fax: 717-533-8661 
E-mail: cust@igi-global.com 
Web site: http://www.igi-global.com 

Copyright © 2021 by IGI Global. All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored or distributed in 
any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, without written permission from the publisher. 
Product or company names used in this set are for identification purposes only. Inclusion of the names of the products or 
companies does not indicate a claim of ownership by IGI Global of the trademark or registered trademark. 

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Names: Rodrigues, Dario de Oliveira, 1963- editor. 
Title: Political and economic implications of blockchain technology in 
business and healthcare / Dario de Oliveira Rodrigues, editor. 
Description: Hershey, PA : Business Science Reference, [2021] | Includes 
bibliographical references and index. | Summary: “This book provides 
relevant theoretical frameworks on the political and economic impact of 
blockchain technology, which is thought to be able to redesign human 
interactions concerning transactions”-- Provided by publisher. 
Identifiers: LCCN 2021005801 (print) | LCCN 2021005802 (ebook) | ISBN 
9781799873631 (hardcover) | ISBN 9781799873648 (paperback) | ISBN 
9781799873655 (ebook) 
Subjects: LCSH: Technological innovations--Economic aspects. | Blockchains 
(Databases)--Industrial applications. | Blockchains 
(Databases)--Economic aspects. 
Classification: LCC HC79.T4 P649 2021 (print) | LCC HC79.T4 (ebook) | DDC 
338/.064--dc23 
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2021005801 
LC ebook record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2021005802 

This book is published in the IGI Global book series Advances in Data Mining and Database Management (ADMDM) 
(ISSN: 2327-1981; eISSN: 2327-199X) 

British Cataloguing in Publication Data 
A Cataloguing in Publication record for this book is available from the British Library. 

All work contributed to this book is new, previously-unpublished material. The views expressed in this book are those of the 
authors, but not necessarily of the publisher. 

For electronic access to this publication, please contact: eresources@igi-global.com. 


Chapter 10 
Data Security in Clinical Trials 
Using Blockchain Technology 


Marta de-Melo-Diogo 

ISEG, Lisbon School of Economics and Management, University of Lisbon, Portugal 

Jorge Tavares 

NOVA IMS, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Portugal 

Ângelo Nunes Luís 

ISEG, Lisbon School of Economics and Management, University of Lisbon, Portugal 

ABSTRACT 


Blockchain technology in a clinical trial setting is a valuable asset due to decentralization, immutability, 
transparency, and traceability features. For this chapter, a literature review was conducted to map the 
current utilization of blockchain systems in clinical trials, particularly data security managing systems 
and their characteristics, such as applicability, interests of use, limitations, and issues. The advantages 
of data security are producing a more transparent and tamper-proof clinical trial by providing accurate, 
validated data, therefore producing a more reliable and credible clinical trial. On the other hand, data 
integrity is a critical issue since data obtained from trials are not instantly made public to all participants. 
Work needs to be done to establish the significant implications in security data when applying blockchain 
technology in a real-world clinical trial setting and generalized conditions of use to establish its security. 

INTRODUCTION 


Since its discovery, Blockchain is emerging as an innovative technology to provide data transactions and 
storage in an effective, secure, and timely manner system. This technology has been applied to many 
sectors of activity, potentializing its features and improving processes and business mindsets. 

The health sector is no exception, and many uses of this technology have been reported. Blockchain’s 
full applicability in healthcare is still underway, and many optimizations are needed to be made, not 

DOI: 10.4018/978-1-7998-7363-1.ch010 

Copyright © 2021, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited. 


Data Security in Clinical Trials Using Blockchain Technology 


only from a technology development perspective but also concerns about ethical and data protection 
regulation are raised and need improvement. 

It is considered essential to mention that the interest in the applicability of blockchain systems in the 
healthcare sector has been increasing since 2016. More specifically, the number of published articles 
related to Blockchain in the Pubmed bibliographic database has increased drastically in 2018 (only five 
studies were published in 2016 and only 16 in 2017), reflecting the potential and growing interest of 
these systems in the healthcare sector (Mackey et al., 2019). Only 4% of these studies were related to 
clinical trials, and 32% were related to healthcare data (Mackey et al., 2019). 

Particularly in clinical trials, this technology is yet to reach its full potential. Nevertheless, considering 
the dimension and complexity of a clinical trial network and process interlined, blockchain technology 
might improve data sharing, management, and access to all key players. However, identifying the risks 
and threats of applying this technology in such an environment is still amiss, and work needs to be done 
to establish them in a realistic scenario setting. 

Therefore, the purpose of this chapter is to map the current use of blockchain systems in clinical trials, 
particularly data security managing systems, and its characteristics, such as applicability, interests 
of use, limitations, and issues, as reported throughout the literature review. 

BACKGROUND 


Although variations of term have been used before, Blockchain came around in 2008 when this technology 
was created by Satoshi Nakamoto to support and securely record Bitcoin cryptocurrency transactions 
(Meunier, 2018; Monrat et al., 2019). Since then, the interest in this technology has increased and soon 
was applied into other areas of interested such as government, manufacturing, finance, healthcare and 
distribution (Monrat et al., 2019). 

Blockchain is an advanced data structure, designed for storing and sharing information, composed by 
a growing chain of blocks organized by chronological order (Agbo et al., 2019)(S Chen, Hannah et al., 
2019). Each block stores information with digital signatures in a decentralized and distributed network, 
it allows to record a transaction by binding different blocks connected with chains (S Chen, Hannah et 
al., 2019) (Abu-elezz et al., 2020) (Monrat et al., 2019). This transaction is validated by a consent algorithm, 
and therefore, needs no third-party validation to complete an action. The chain continues to grow 
as new transactions are built and blocks are added into it (Omar, Jayaraman, Salah, Yaqoob, et al., 2020). 

Unlike traditional methods, blockchain enables peer-to-peer transfer of digital assets without any 
intermediaries. All the transactions occur in a decentralized manner that eliminates the requirement for 
any intermediaries to validate and verify the transactions. Every transaction is regulated by the participants 
who store and share the information throughout the private key: an unique and individual signature 
linked to each transaction recorded (S Chen, Hannah et al., 2019). 

The digitalization era is reaching almost every industry and is expected that the Distribution Ledger 
Technology, where technologies such as blockchain, artificial intelligence and Internet of Things are 
inserted, to reach a market value of $60.7 billion by 2024 (Smetanin et al., 2020). 

The features of blockchain, include (Hussien et al., 2019): 

• Decentralization, access of information through third parties with multiple copies in multiple 
locations; 

Data Security in Clinical Trials Using Blockchain Technology 


• Consent, the consensus algorithm created controls the access and distribution within a network; 
• Immutability: once the information has entered a blockchain no longer can be changed or altered; 
a 
• Auditability and transparency, every transaction information and signature can be traced; interoperability, 
different systems are connected and communicate in an autonomous manner. 
The blockchain platform is distinguished by its key characteristics enabling it to be a promising 
disruptive technology that reduces the emphasis on traditional data management systems (Omar, Jayaraman, 
Salah, Yaqoob, et al., 2020). The blockchain is poised to innovate and transform a wide range of 
applications, including goods transfer (supply chain), digital media transfer (sale of art), remote services 
delivery (travel and tourism), platforms for example, moving computing to data sources and distributed 
credentialing. 

Healthcaresystemsarecomplexandmulti-dimensionalorganizations,involvingmultipleprofessionals 
whin different functions and degrees of access information, multiple organizations of different sectors 
of activities such as regulatory agencies, insurance companies, suppliers, technical supports and many 
others. Providing care to a patient involves many professionals and actions, therefore is important that 
health records are available and updated in time to provide the accurate and appropriate care to each 
patient at all times. On the other hand, it is also important that every patient owns is medical record and 
has fully knowledge of the parties that have been granted access to the very same. 

Data security and ownership represent two of the most sensitive topics of today’s generation. In fact, 
since the approval of General Data Protection Regulation in 2016 in European Union, when it comes to 
medical records these two topics became even more important and prominent. Besides this, managing 
patient data integrity is one of the major concerns for the healthcare industry, combining the need to 
access each patient characteristics and complete medical records at any time. 

The introduction of blockchain systems in healthcare might be the solution to some of the concerns 
raised in data security and medical records accessibility and might the solution to gather and improve 
communications and data sharing between every player in the healthcare systems. 

Concerning blockchain applications in healthcare, blockchain benefits are the following (Agbo et 
al., 2019)(Hasselgren et al., 2020): 

• Decentralization: Healthcare access is spread to multiple players, such as doctors, hospitals, health 
insurance companies, pharmacies, etc. This feature of blockchain allows access to multiple stakeholders 
in a timely manner and provides information sharing in real time. 
• Transparency: Given the security and transparency of transactions, information systems and storing 
systems are very reliable, and therefore provide a solid source of information for healthcare 
stakeholders. This feature is very important for example, when submitting information to regulatory 
agencies. 
• Data verifiability: every transaction can be check for its integrity and validity. This information 
is important for healthcare records validation, insurance claim verification and in pharmaceutical 
supply chain to detect contrafact products. 
• Transparency and trust: given the amount of information stored and that every transaction is record, 
blockchain provide for healthcare providers and stakeholders an ambient of trust and transparency 
since every information is available to consult. 

Data Security in Clinical Trials Using Blockchain Technology 


• Robustness: The blockchain storage method guarantees that data is available and prevented from 
loss. 
• Data ownership: given the levels of access and control of access of a blockchain, through this 
data storage system, patients are able to a more detailed control of the availability of their medical 
records to third parties. 
• Data security and privacy: once an information has entered in a blockchain it is extremely difficult 
to alter through maleficent intentions. Additionally, every transaction is recorded in chronological 
order and is also traceable by its time stamp and user responsible for that action. 
Concerning healthcare, blockchain systems can be applied in different areas such as (PwC, 2018) 
(Deloitte, 2020)(S Chen, Hannah et al., 2019)(Tan et al., 2020) (Smetanin et al., 2020) (Omar, Jayaraman, 
Salah, Yaqoob, et al., 2020)(Monrat et al., 2019): 

• Supply chain: products status can be checked by the supplier at all times. This includes information 
regarding the transportation route, and more importantly, about controlled factors such as 
temperature and humidity throughout the transportation, contributing for a better monitorization 
and assuring the quality and safety of the products delivered. This contribution is especially important 
when it comes to products that need refrigeration, such as vaccines and biological products. 
Blockchain systems also improve security and authenticity of the products delivered, tacking 
the issue of distribution of falsified drugs. 
• Precision medicine and medical records: the access of multiple players in healthcare to medical 
records of a patient in real time not only can improve the care provided, and can also potentiate the 
uses of precision medicine, since the patient medical records and genomic data can by easy shared 
between doctors and researchers. 
• Data management: Gathering medical records, expenses and reports concerning a medical treatment 
could be time consuming and an extensive process. Blockchain can improve this field since 
data sharing would be available and updated by the multiple players making the communication 
between them more efficient, for example between a hospital and an insurance company. 
• Electronic prescription: electronic prescription would be improved by blockchain systems, given 
the ability of the information can be spread throughout the different services such as hospitaldoctor-
patient-pharmacy. Patient electronic devices can be also updated with app to monitor the 
adhesion to therapy, giving precious information to the doctor and pharmacist about the success 
of the treatment in a timely manner. 
• Regulatory compliance: given the security and data authenticity provided by blockchain systems, 
regulatory compliance and monitorization of records by the regulatory agencies can be improved 
and in case of no compliance, actions could be performed in a timely manner. 
• Research and development: clinical research data throughout every step of a clinical trial could 
be actively monitored, the information shared between multiple stakeholders have a high classification 
of security and authenticity, logistical processes can also be improved, such as patient 
recruitment, payments, consent and authorization, etc. 
It is clear that Blockchain technology can bring many improvements for the healthcare sector, in 
fact, by 2022 it is expected that the blockchain market in healthcare sector is valued in $500 million and 


Data Security in Clinical Trials Using Blockchain Technology 


those investment would be in the clinical trial management, improvement of sharing electronic records 
and fulfilling regulatory compliance (Hasselgren et al., 2020). 

One of the essential uses of blockchain in the healthcare is, undoubtedly the clinical trials, the 
theme of this chapter. Specifically, the key features of blockchain technology, such as data provenance, 
transparency, decentralized transaction validation, and immutability, may contribute to overcome data 
management issues in clinical trials (Omar, Jayaraman, Salah, Yaqoob, et al., 2020). Areas of clinical 
trials where blockchain represents an improvement also include patient recruitment, medical data sharing 
and privacy, data integrity, consent traceability and transparency, as mentioned before (Omar, Jayaraman, 
Salah, Yaqoob, et al., 2020). 

On the other hand, another important topic in authenticity in clinical trials is related to data management. 
Data could be altered or lost which could represent a major problem in a clinical trial setting 
creating an untrustworthy environment. In fact, 80% of the assays submitted to FDA are not reproductible 
due to the presence of various errors, such as fraud, data misrepresentation, and trial misconduct (Petre 
& Haï, 2018). This is one of the factors that contributes to data obtained from clinical trials not being 
immediately made public to key-players. 

Taking all of this into consideration, to further explore the benefits, disadvantages, threats and opportunities 
of blockchains in clinical trials in data management, a review as conducted to map this information. 

Review Methods 


Research Objective 


There are several studies reporting the advantages and disadvantages and applicability of blockchains in 
clinical trials, however the knowledge of those characteristics when applied to data security in clinical 
trials is lacking. 

The role of this review is to map the current utilization of blockchain systems in clinical trials, particularly 
the data security managing system and its characteristics, such as applicability, interests of use, 
limitations and issues, as reported in literature. 

Inthissectionwereportthemethodologyappliedtoconductthisreviewincludingtheselectionprocess. 

Research Protocol 


To identify potentially relevant publications a search was conducted on November 8th, 2020 in the fol


lowing online bibliographic databases: PubMed, Science Direct and Google Scholar. 

Backward-reference list checking was conducted to identify other relevant references. 

The search was conducted using several combination of search terms in order to establish first the 
amount of information available related to blockchain and to clinical trials or health care sector, and 
secondly directly related to data security provided by a blockchain in a clinical trial setting. Therefore, 
several search terms were used and ultimately the search words used to retrieve studies from databases 
has: “blockchain” AND “Healthcare” AND “Clinical trials” AND “data security”. 

Data Base Selection Criteria 


Search was conducted simultaneously in three data bases: PubMed, Science Direct and Google Scholar. 


Data Security in Clinical Trials Using Blockchain Technology 


Pubmed database was considered, as it is one of the leading databases in healthcare content. Google 
Scholar database was chosen in order to bring different background and variability content sources. Science 
Direct database was chosen considering the high percentage of peer-review content. 

Eligibility Criteria 


In this review were included studies and review studies that reported the advantages and disadvantages 
of use of blockchain in clinical trials particularly in the data security optic. For the purpose of this study 
were excluded studies that merged blockchain and other technologies not related to the theme of this 
chapter and that targeted blockchain uses in healthcare other than clinical trials. 

Information from magazines with peer-review, newspapers, conference abstracts and book chapters 
were excluded from this review. Were included studies from 2017 onwards since no relevant information 
before that year has found in the literature associated with blockchain and its uses in clinical trials. 

Additionally, studies that were written in languages other than French and English were excluded. 
This criteria was established given the authors proficiency in the selected languages. 

The study eligibility criteria are described in Table 1. 

Table 1. Eligibility criteria of studies included in this work 

Inclusion Criteria 
Studies that address benefits and/or threats of blockchain in Clinical trials 
Studies from 2017 onwards 
Studies reported in English or French 
Information from magazines, newspapers, conference abstracts and book chapters 
Exclusion Criteria Studies that merged blockchain and other technologies not relevant to the theme of the 
chapter 
Studies that targeted other uses of blockchain in healthcare other than clinical trials 

Study Selection Process 


As mentioned above, studies were retrieved from multiple bibliographic databases resulting from a 
process divided into four phases: (i) screening phase, were multiple search words were used to establish 
the amount of studies related to the theme; (ii) identification phase, were the citations were retrieved 
from the several databases; (iii) screening phase, where titles and abstracts of citations were screened to 
select or exclude articles; (iv) duplicates screening phase, were the citations whom were considered as 
relevant during screening phase were checked for duplicates; (v) eligibility phase, where the full-texts 
of articles were read to assess their relevancy to this study. 

Data Extraction and Data Synthesis 


A summary of the included studies related to the theme of this review were extracted from the selected 
citations and the articles were categorized by the type of publication. The year of publication was also 
extracted from the articles. 


Data Security in Clinical Trials Using Blockchain Technology 


Search Findings 


The number of articles retrieved and consequent process of studies search and selection is described in 
Figure 1. 

Figure 1. Study selection and research process. 


As a result from the initial search with search terms “blockchain” AND “healthcare”, a total of 24692 
results were obtained gathered from the three bibliographic databases used. After a combination of different 
search words, as described in Table 2, the search words used (“blockchain” AND “healthcare” 
AND “clinical trials” AND “data security”) produced a total of 52 records to be screened considering 
the inclusion and exclusion criteria mentioned above. Therefore, these records were screened through 
their title and abstract and 22 were excluded considering the fact they were not related to the theme or 
not scientific content. Afterwards, the records were checked for duplicates and 11 records were deleted. 
A number of 19 records were gathered to check its full text for eligibility and 17 records were considered 
relevant. 

Backward reference was partially conducted to gather additional studies relevant to the theme. Overall, 
20 studies were included in this review. 


Data Security in Clinical Trials Using Blockchain Technology 


Table 2. Results obtained using the several search terms across the three bibliographic databases 
(Pubmed, Science Direct and Google Scholar) 

Search Terms Number of Results (n) 
“blockchain” AND “Healthcare” 24692 
“blockchain” AND “Healthcare” AND “Clinical trials” 1534 
“blockchain” AND “Healthcare” AND “Clinical trials” AND “security” 1130 
“blockchain” AND “Healthcare” AND “Clinical trials” AND “data security” 52 
“blockchain” AND “clinical trials” 191 

List of the Articles Reviewed 


• Abu-elezz et al., (2020) -The benefits and threats of blockchain technology in healthcare: A scoping 
review 
• Angeletti et al., 2017 -The role of blockchain and IoT in recruiting participants for digital clinical 
trials 
• Benchoufi et al., 2017 -Blockchain protocols in clinical trials: Transparency and traceability of 
consent 
• Benchoufi et al., 2019 -From Clinical Trials to Highly Trustable Clinical Trials: Blockchain in 
Clinical Trials, a Game Changer for Improving Transparency? 
• Benchoufi & Ravaud, 2017. Blockchain technology for improving clinical research quality. 
• Choudhury et al., 2019 -A Blockchain Framework for Managing and Monitoring Data in Multi-
Site Clinical Trials 
• Drosatos & Kaldoudi, (2019) -Blockchain Applications in the Biomedical Domain: A Scoping 
Review 
• Hirano et al., 2020 -Data Validation and Verification Using Blockchain in a Clinical Trial for 
Breast Cancer: Regulatory Sandbox 
• Kamel Boulos et al., 2018 -Geospatial blockchain: promises, challenges, and scenarios in health 
and healthcare 
• Mackey et al., 2019 -‘Fit-for-purpose?’ – challenges and opportunities for applications of blockchain 
technology in the future of healthcare 
• Maslove et al., 2018 -Using Blockchain Technology to Manage Clinical Trials Data: A Proof-of-
Concept Study 
• Monrat et al., 2019 -A survey of blockchain from the perspectives of applications, challenges, 
and opportunities. 
• Omar, Jayaraman, Salah, Simsekler, et al., 2020 -Ensuring protocol compliance and data transparency 
in clinical trials using Blockchain smart contracts 
• Omar, Jayaraman, Salah, Yaqoob, et al., 2020 -Applications of Blockchain Technology in Clinical 
Trials: Reviewand Open Challenges 
• Petre & Haï, 2018 -Opportunities and challenges of blockchain technology in the healthcare 
industry 
• Radanovic et al., 2018 - Opportunities for Use of Blockchain Technology in Medicine 

Data Security in Clinical Trials Using Blockchain Technology 


• Tandon et al., 2020 -Blockchain in healthcare: A systematic literature review, synthesizing framework 
and future research agenda 
• Wong et al., 2019 -Prototype of running clinical trials in an untrustworthy environment using 
blockchain 
• Yan Zhuang et al., 2019 -Applying Blockchain Technology to Enhance Clinical Trial Recruitment 
• Yu Zhuang et al., 2018 -Applying Blockchain Technology for Health Information Exchange and 
Persistent Monitoring for Clinical Trials 
Characteristics of the Selected Studies 


As presented in Figure 2, more than 50% of the studies selected for this article were published afterwards 
the year of 2019 (5 published in 2019 and 6 published in 2020, therefore 11 of 19 studies selected). Additionally, 
4 of the selected studies were published in 2018 and only 3 studies were published in 2017. 

Figure 2. Distribution of included studies by year of publication. 


As presented in Figure 3 the selected studies for this article have a heterogenous distribution if the 
type of publication is considered. In fact, 3 of the studies were classified as articles, 4 as research articles, 
4 as reviews, 1 as a paper, 2 as editorials, 1 as method article, 4 as research articles and 3 as proof of 
concept work. 


Data Security in Clinical Trials Using Blockchain Technology 


Figure 3. Study type of publication 


Summary of the Included Studies 


Several citations enumerate the major benefits and threats of blockchain technology application in a 
healthcare system, including in a clinical trial setting (Abu-elezz et al., 2020) (Drosatos & Kaldoudi, 
2019) (Petre & Haï, 2018) (Tandon et al., 2020) (Choudhury et al., 2019) (Omar, Jayaraman, Salah, 
Yaqoob, et al., 2020) (Angeletti et al., 2017) (Kamel Boulos et al., 2018)(Mackey et al., 2019) (Tandon 
et al., 2020)(Benchoufi et al., 2017; Yan Zhuang et al., 2019) (Yu Zhuang et al., 2018). They reflect 
that this technology adds significant value through improved efficiency, access control, technological 
advancement, privacy protection, and security of data management processes. However, in general, there 
are also some disadvantages mentioned related to high implementations costs, need for robust systems 
and specialized human resources, difficulty of scalability and data security and protection issues. 

Several studies develop and implement blockchain systems in hypothetical real-life clinical trials. 
Omar, Jayaraman, Salah, Simsekler, et al (2020) propose a blockchain-based framework for clinical trial 
data management, using Ethereum smart contracts, concluding that the use of these systems assures data 
integrity, transparency, and traceability of the process in a clinical trial. Wong et al (2019) proposes a 
blockchain-based system to make data collected in the clinical trial process immutable, traceable, and 
potentially more trustworthy, and its resilience to data tampering. Maslove et al. (2018) explores the role 
of blockchain in supporting clinical trials data management and develop a proof-of-concept implementation 
of a patient-facing and researcher-facing system. Hirano et al (2020) validate a system that enables 
the security of medical data in a clinical trial using blockchain technology. 

Tandon et al (2020) addresses the concerns for the improvement of regulatory compliance and security. 
Several important aspects are highlighted, particularly that further work needs to be done to address 
blockchain systems vulnerabilities and robustness, data privacy and authentication in shared storages. 


Data Security in Clinical Trials Using Blockchain Technology 


BLOCKCHAIN IN CLINICAL TRIALS 


As mentioned before, the interest of the applicability of blockchain systems in the healthcare sector has 
been increasing since 2016. In fact, this growing interest was also palpable through the research made 
for this chapter in Pubmed database, using the search words “blockchain” AND “healthcare” 153 results 
were obtained. This represents an increase of about 139% of the number of citations published in this 
database since 2018. Additionally, using the search words “blockchain” and “clinical trials” in Pubmed 
database 19 citations were obtained, which also represents an increasing number of citations since 2018 
related to clinical trials and blockchain systems. 

Blockchain Advantages and Disadvantages in Clinical Trials 


Clinical trials require data and information to be well organized and categorized for the submission of 
the findings to the regulatory agency for the approval of the drug in test. Such compliance can be time 
consuming and resource consuming considering the amount of data, number of individuals and entities 
involved, and therefore it is a process particularly prone to human and system errors. 

Blockchain can be the solution for the majority of errors that happen in clinical trials. Therefore, this 
technology can solve human errors such as: inconsistent data entry (transcription and transposition errors) 
and missing signatures/authorizations and system errors such as loss of data. Having a blockchain 
system that allows, in real time, the users in the network to verify, identify and solve the errors, can be 
a major improvement in clinical trials. 

In fact, the most pressing challenges in clinical trials include access and management of clinical trial 
data; data integrity and provenance for clinical trial processes for regulatory purposes; updating and 
maintaining patient consent; and patient recruitment and enrolment, reproducibility of results, protocol 
compliance and data sharing (Mackey et al., 2019) (Omar, Jayaraman, Salah, Simsekler, et al., 2020). 

Blockchain systems have the ability of transforming this process by revolutionizing the way data is 
stored, transmittedand managedthroughoutthe networkof participants,investigatorsand entitiesengaged 
in a clinical trial. Therefore, blockchain can lead to the structuration of a global community gathering 
all the key player involved in a clinical trial setting, such as researchers and patient communities, social 
networks and Internet of Things data flows with features of individual granularity, decentralization and 
security and with transparent interactions to ensure easier and more transparent analysis (Benchoufi & 
Ravaud, 2017). An additional asset is the possibility of a closer monitorization of patient health data 
tracking and health status (Abu-elezz et al., 2020). 

Disadvantages of blockchain system in clinical trials are related to organizational difficulties, such 
as installations and transactions costs, operability issues and the need of specialized technical resources 
to manage these systems scalability issues, authorization and security issues, high energy consumption, 
and slow processing speeds. It is important to emphasize that the interoperability is also one of the 
major challenges for the blockchain adoption due to the lack of trust between healthcare organizations 
and lesser number of IT (Information Technology) professionals available to implement the technology. 
Lack of sufficient technical skills while implementing blockchain technologies may lead to disastrous 
consequences (Abu-elezz et al., 2020). 

The principal advantages and disadvantages of the utilization of blockchain technology in clinical 
trials is summarized in Table 3. 


Data Security in Clinical Trials Using Blockchain Technology 


Table 3. Advantages and disadvantages of blockchain technology used in clinical trials 

Advantages 
Monitorization 
Transparency 
Immutability 
Decentralization 
Real-time consent 
Real time access to all key players involved 
General access to all key players (need to constrain access depending on its user) 
Implementation system difficulties 
Need of specialized technical resources 
Disadvantages High levels of protection needed 
Implementation costs 
Scalabilities difficulties 
Appropriate software and hardware 

Advantages of Blockchain Applied to Data Security in Clinical Trials 


Considering the four main assets of blockchain systems in a clinical trial setting monitorization, transparency, 
immutability, and decentralization, blockchain technology might also prove to be useful in supporting 
or even supplanting the traditional data infrastructure used in clinical trials. Blockchain enables 
to establish a permanent record agreed upon by all participating parties, therefore has a tremendous 
potential to mitigate some of the threats related to data validity. 

Taking all of this into consideration, in a real-world setting blockchain technology might have the 
following characteristics in terms of data security: 

• Establish a more difficult precedent to falsifications or adulterations of data, since every transaction 
is monitored, time-stamped, transparent and in real time; 
• Enables permanent recordings, a very desirable asset for clinical trial auditing; 
• More compatibility between the results presented to the regulatory agency and later published in 
scientific publications; 
• More efficient volunteer recruitment and protocol attribution; 
• More accurate access and recording of data; 
• Overall, less time consuming and more, efficient process of data recording, processing and storage. 
Ultimately, blockchain systems in terms of data security, specifically, address the questions of data 
validity, integrity and reproducibility and therefore stands to achieve more confidence and veracity in 
the results obtained in a clinical trial (Maslove et al., 2018). 


Data Security in Clinical Trials Using Blockchain Technology 


Types of Blockchain and Their Applicability in Clinical Trials 


Blockchain can be applied in the healthcare sector due to its many characteristics such as immutability, 
decentralization, traceability and transparency (Abu-elezz et al., 2020). This technology has a potential 
in protecting sensitive information such as patient related information (medical records and personal 
information). Therefore, these characteristics have the most relevant interest in the clinical trials setting. 

The potential of the Blockchain applicability to clinical trials relies on the type of Blockchain technology 
used. As described by Abu-elezz et al., (2020) there are three different design types considering 
their access permissions: public (permissionless), private (permissioned) and hybrid blockchains. Public 
blockchains allow anyone to participate and allow a complete transparent view to anyone participating 
in it, and there is no control by any single user on identity. On the other hand, private blockchains are 
only open for those who are invited to join the network, but nevertheless, the process remains transparent 
for everyone included in the network. Finally, it is important to characterize the third different type of 
blockchain. Hybrid Blockchains are a type of blockchains that are flexible because they allow the users 
to choose the data they want to be made available for the public and the data they want to be kept private 
for them (Abu-elezz et al., 2020) . To be easily understood, they can be seen as a public blockchain where 
a private network is hosted, where all of the users only have access to the data that is available for them. 
Taking all of this into consideration, hybrid blockchains associated with smart contracts could represent 
a solid method to use in a clinical trial setting since it has the possibility to select a specific amount of 
data to be available or kept private to the public, as previously mentioned (Kamel Boulos et al., 2018). 
This platform is more flexible compared to other types of blockchain because it enables the consensus 
mechanisms to be controlled by selected users in a decentralized manner, which in other hand, makes 
its structure more vulnerable to information (Omar, Jayaraman, Salah, Yaqoob, et al., 2020). 

Smart Contracts 


Another major contribution of blockchain technology in a clinical trial setting is the ability to provide in 
real time consent by the patient to protocol alterations by the sponsor (Petre & Haï, 2018). This process 
is followed through smart contracts. 

Smart contracts are a type of code that is stored, executed, and verified on a blockchain, and also 
has the ability to act on clinical data sharing, either through storing the data itself or instructions on 
who can access that data (Maslove et al., 2018)(Kamel Boulos et al., 2018). Smart contracts can play 
several roles, including encoding the business logic for an application, ensuring that preconditions for 
action are met before itis executed, and enforcing permissions for an action. As described by Maslove 
et al. (2018), smart contracts run on a blockchain, they have unique characteristics compared with other 
types of software. First, the program itself is recorded on the blockchain, which imparts the blockchain’s 
characteristic permanence and resistance to censorship. Second, the program can control blockchain 
assets. Third, the program is executed by the blockchain, meaning it will always execute as written and 
no one can interfere with its operation. 

Since Smart Contracts all transactions follow rigorous protocols under secure conditions, their use 
has the possibility to ensure data provenance and create immutable audit trails, and potentially add more 
integrity and confidence to a clinical trial, by reducing, prevent and detect fraudulent activities and errors 
(Yu Zhuang et al., 2018). 


Data Security in Clinical Trials Using Blockchain Technology 


Benchoufi & Ravaud (2017), described a Smart Contract example applied to a clinical trial setting. 
In their example, each of the clinical trial steps (trial protocol setup, patient enrollment, data collection, 
trial monitoring, data management, data analysis, study report, diffusion of results) as described in 
Figure 4, can be chained together in a preceding order, consolidating a transparent trial and preventing 
a posteriori reconstruction or beautification of data by granting several levels of access. This example 
represents a piece of code that holds a programmatically written contract between as many parties as 
needed, without any trusted third party, and that executes algorithmically according to the terms provided 
by the contracting parties, making the process more automatic, transparent and less prone to falsifications 
(Benchoufi & Ravaud, 2017). 

Blockchain Systems Protection Against Liabilities 


Blockchain technology allows the users to track more closely and in real time, the series of events occurring 
in clinical trials. This is crucial when we are talking about security and protection. By tracing and 
controlling the processes of clinical trials, Blockchain can prevent frauds or at least discourage them, 
because they become traceable and averted. But this technology cannot protect against every threat, 
such as data invention or data falsification since it only protects the information with time stamps and 
traceability once the information has entered the system (Benchoufi et al., 2019). 

Other threats to the validity of clinical trials data stand to undermine the veracity of a clinical trial. 
These threats could be defined as internal, when they occur within the users of a blockchain, or external, 
when they came from outside the network of blockchain users, for example in a cyber-attack. 

Maslove et al (2018) identified some of these threats. Data can be altered or lost, either accidentally 
or by nefarious intent; there is a risk that the published analysis is not a true representation of the analysis 
that was initially planned due for example to lack of monitorization resulting in a bias of the information 
presented to the regulatory agencies and later published in scientific publications; and lastly, data may 
be fabricated, manipulated, or duplicated by researchers committing outright fraud. 

Some of the functionalities of the Blockchain technology like timestamping, time-ordering and the 
smart contracts can define a roadmap, that helps tracking errors and frauds. Clinical trials can benefit a 
lot from using these roadmaps (Benchoufi et al., 2019). 

Omar, Jayaraman, Salah, Simsekler, et al., (2020) developed a blockchain-based solution and simulated 
several data mistakes or internal malicious attempts. These were stopped since the recorded data 
is validated using consensus algorithms resulting in a tamper-proof system. 

As described by Omar, Jayaraman, Salah, Simsekler, et al., (2020) one of the biggest threats to the 
blockchain technology are the selfish mining external attacks. Blockchains are vulnerable to 51% of 
these attacks. This generally occurs when malicious blocks are higher than honest blocks in a network. 
As a result, one of the possibilities is that a new block gets attached to the malicious chain. This strategy 
is called selfish mining because selfish miners keep their blocks private and reveal them to the public 
only when the private chain is longer than the current public chain, and thus, it may be accepted by all 
miners in the network (Omar, Jayaraman, Salah, Simsekler, et al., 2020). 


Data Security in Clinical Trials Using Blockchain Technology 


SOLUTIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 


Clinical trials require data and information to be well organized and categorized for the submission of 
the findings to the regulatory agency for the approval of the drug in test. Such compliance can be time 
and resource consuming considering the amount of data, number of individuals and entities involved, 
and therefore it is a process particularly prone to human and system errors. 

In fact, the most pressing challenges in clinical trials include access and management of clinical 
trial data; data integrity and provenance for clinical trial processes for regulatory purposes; updating 
and maintaining patient consent; patient recruitment and enrolment, reproducibility of results, protocol 
compliance and data sharing. 

From the review conducted it is possible to point out that the operational benefits of implementing a 
blockchain technology to conduct a clinical trial are hardly contestable. Indeed, this technology solves 
many logistical constrains in terms of data sharing, communication between each involved parties and 
data storage and traceability. 

Blockchain certainly represent a technology capable of managing and improving the information 
system in the healthcare sector and, particularly, in the clinical trial area, by allowing a more transparent, 
real time and authentic process when submitting a new drug for regulatory approval. Blockchain 
allows several levels of optimization regarding the organization aspects of a clinical trial (number of 
participants, number of departments and their areas of action) and in an individual level (the patient has 
more control and monitorization of his own progression), also. 

Reproducibility and data integrity are crucial factors in a clinical trial setting. Regulatory agencies 
not only shall be able to trace back and identify the players responsible for any information in a clinical 
trial environment, but also be able to trust the validity of that content. In fact, 80% of the assays submitted 
to FDA are not reproductible (Petre & Haï, 2018). Blockchain improves the traceability of data and 
therefore stands to tackle this issue. 

Blockchain offers a valuable contribution in addressing this problem since every transaction is validated 
using consensus algorithms and identity signatures with identification and date stamps. 

Notwithstanding, blockchain cannot address a problem that still could affect the integrity and veracity 
of a clinical trial. In fact, if the information itself introduced in a software is wrong or misleading, 
this technology cannot address this issue. Blockchain, only, can track this wrong data and timestamp it. 
There is yet a need to find a solution within the design and operational side of a clinical trial to tackle 
this question. 

Considering the four main assets of blockchain systems in a clinical trial setting, monitorization, 
transparency, immutability, and decentralization, blockchain technology might also prove useful in supporting 
or even supplanting the traditional data infrastructure used in clinical trials. Blockchain enables 
to establish a permanent record agreed upon by all participating parties, therefore has a tremendous 
potential to mitigate some of the threats related to data validity. 

Disadvantages of blockchain system in clinical trials are related to organizational difficulties, such 
as installations and transactions costs, operability issues and the need of specialized technical resources 
to manage these systems scalability issues, authorization, security issues, high energy consumption, and 
slow processing speeds. 

Overall, this technology has the ability of producing a clinical trial more transparent and tamper 
proofing by providing authentic validated data, and therefore, producing a more reliable and credible 
clinical trial. Nevertheless, there are some technical issues that need to be overcome, such as scalability, 


Data Security in Clinical Trials Using Blockchain Technology 


implementation costs, the need of technical resources and processing difficulties of implementation and 
operation. Solving all these issues, we can expect blockchain technology to be fully adopted in clinical 
trials, with substantial improvements. 

FUTURE RESEARCH DIRECTIONS 


Work needs to be done to establish the major implications in security data when applying blockchain 
technology in a real-word clinical trial setting and in generalized conditions of use, since as we move 
forward through the several phases of a clinical trial more data, more participants and more complexity 
of results are expected and thereby there is a need of a robust and reliable system to maintain the 
necessary trust levels to present the findings of a clinical trial to support the process of drug approval 
to a regulatory agency. 

On a regulatory level, it is also important that key regulatory agencies such as FDA and EMA, provide 
guidelines to construct a blockchain managing system in clinical trials, in order to establish uniformity 
between the several systems used by different companies and guarantee the overall compliance with 
ethical, regulatory and safety requirements of a clinical trial. 

Covid-19 pandemic lockdown revolutionized the use of technology and overall ability to distance 
and virtual communication in healthcare. Because of the pandemic, in one year, technology evolved 
exponentially, in a way never seen before. Given this opportunity, the bases of a digital revolution in 
healthcare are in order. However, it is important to take into consideration the technology literacy of 
healthcare professionals and volunteers in clinical trials. In fact, in a survey conducted by HSCB to 
Bitcoin users about Blockchain, 80% of the percentage of consumers that are familiarized with the term 
didn’t know or fully understand the concept (Radanović & Likić, 2018). Therefore, digital education 
and technological formation of each player in clinical trials should be a priority to the implementation 
of blockchain systems. This is essential for the correct adoption of the technology in the clinical trials 
and if it doesn´t happen, the errors that will occur, can be disastrous. 

On the other hand, considering the high level of investment and the need of technological specialized 
work force to design and run a blockchain system, investments and grants should be also created to incentivize 
not only the adoption of these systems, but also to educate specialized work force. There aren´t 
many specialized professionals that know how to work with this technology and that fully understand it, 
so, this digital formation must be given to the healthcare professionals, in order to have the best results 
possible. Of course, this formation involves a large investment, so this must be taken into consideration. 

Lastly, considering the importance and impact of the data stored in a clinical trial not only on a 
regulatory level but also on a personal level considering the number of volunteers involved, additional 
work shall also be made to establish the security of a blockchain system applied in a clinical trial setting 
to external hazards such as cyber-attacks. 

CONCLUSION 


Ultimately, blockchain systems represent a technology capable of managing and improving the information 
organization system in the healthcare sector, specifically in the clinical trial area, by allowing 
a more transparent, real-time, and exact process when submitting a new drug for regulatory approval. 


Data Security in Clinical Trials Using Blockchain Technology 


Blockchain allows several optimization levels regarding the organizational aspects of a clinical trial 
(number of participants, number of departments, and their areas of action) and individual level (the 
patient has more control and monitorization of his progression). These advantages also reflect data 
security optic since this technology can produce a more transparent and tamper-proofing clinical trial 
by providing accurate, validated data, producing more reliable and credible outcomes from the research 
conducted in a clinical trial. Nevertheless, some technical issues need to be overcome, such as scalability, 
implementation costs, the need for technical resources, and processing difficulties of implementation 
and operation of blockchain technology. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 


This research received no specific grant from any funding agency in the public, commercial, or not-forprofit 
sectors. 

REFERENCES 


Abu-elezz, I., Hassan, A., Nazeemudeen, A., Househ, M., & Abd-alrazaq, A. (2020). The benefits and 
threats of blockchain technology in healthcare: A scoping review. International Journal of Medical 
Informatics, 142(August), 104246. doi:10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2020.104246 PMID:32828033 

Agbo, C., Mahmoud, Q., & Eklund, J. (2019). Blockchain Technology in Healthcare: A Systematic 
Review. Health Care, 7(2), 56. doi:10.3390/healthcare7020056 PMID:30987333 

Angeletti, F., Chatzigiannakis, I., & Vitaletti, A. (2017). The role of blockchain and IoT in recruiting 
participants for digital clinical trials. 2017 25th International Conference on Software, Telecommunications 
and Computer Networks, SoftCOM 2017. 10.23919/SOFTCOM.2017.8115590 

Benchoufi, M., Altman, D., & Ravaud, P. (2019). From Clinical Trials to Highly Trustable Clinical Trials: 
Blockchain in Clinical Trials, a Game Changer for Improving Transparency? Frontiers in Blockchain, 
2(December), 1–6. doi:10.3389/fbloc.2019.00023 

Benchoufi, M., Porcher, R., & Ravaud, P. (2017). Blockchain protocols in clinical trials: Transparency 
andtraceabilityofconsent.F1000Research, 6,66.doi:10.12688/f1000research.10531.1PMID:29167732 

Benchoufi, M., & Ravaud, P. (2017). Blockchain technology for improving clinical research quality. 
Trials, 18(1), 1–5. doi:10.118613063-017-2035-z PMID:28724395 

Chen, Jarrell, Carpenter, Cohen, & Huang. (2019). Blockchain in Healthcare: A Patient-Centered Model. 
Biomedical Journal of Scientific & Technical Research, 20(3), 15017–15022. PMID:31565696 

Choudhury, O., Fairoza, N., Sylla, I., & Das, A. (2019). A Blockchain Framework for Managing and 
Monitoring Data in Multi-Site Clinical Trials. ArXiv, 1–13. 

Deloitte. (2020). Intelligent drug discovery About the Deloitte Centre for Health Solutions. Author. 


Data Security in Clinical Trials Using Blockchain Technology 


Drosatos, G., & Kaldoudi, E. (2019). Blockchain Applications in the Biomedical Domain: A Scoping Review. 
ComputationalandStructuralBiotechnologyJournal, 17,229–240.doi:10.1016/j.csbj.2019.01.010 
PMID:30847041 

Hasselgren, A., Kralevska, K., Gligoroski, D., Pedersen, S. A., & Faxvaag, A. (2020). Blockchain 
in healthcare and health sciences—A scoping review. International Journal of Medical Informatics, 
134(May), 104040. doi:10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2019.104040 

Hirano, T., Motohashi, T., Okumura, K., Takajo, K., Kuroki, T., Ichikawa, D., Matsuoka, Y., Ochi, 
E., & Ueno, T. (2020). Data validation and verification using blockchain in a clinical trial for breast 
cancer: Regulatory sandbox. Journal of Medical Internet Research, 22(6), 1–21. doi:10.2196/18938 
PMID:32340974 

Hussien, H. M., Yasin, S. M., Udzir, S. N. I., Zaidan, A. A., & Zaidan, B. B. (2019). A Systematic Review 
for Enabling of Develop a Blockchain Technology in Healthcare Application: Taxonomy, Substantially 
Analysis, Motivations, Challenges, Recommendations and Future Direction. Journal of Medical Systems, 
43(10), 320. Advance online publication. doi:10.100710916-019-1445-8 PMID:31522262 

Kamel Boulos, M. N., Wilson, J. T., & Clauson, K. A. (2018). Geospatial blockchain: Promises, challenges, 
and scenarios in health and healthcare. International Journal of Health Geographics, 17(1), 
1–10. doi:10.118612942-018-0144-x PMID:29973196 

Mackey, T. K., Kuo, T. T., Gummadi, B., Clauson, K. A., Church, G., Grishin, D., Obbad, K., Barkovich, 
R., & Palombini, M. (2019). “Fit-for-purpose?” -Challenges and opportunities for applications of 
blockchain technology in the future of healthcare. BMC Medicine, 17(1), 1–17. doi:10.118612916-0191296-
7 PMID:30914045 

Maslove, D. M., Klein, J., Brohman, K., & Martin, P. (2018). Using Blockchain Technology to 
Manage Clinical Trials Data: A Proof-of-Concept Study. JMIR Medical Informatics, 6(4), e11949. 
doi:10.2196/11949 PMID:30578196 

Meunier, S. (2018). Blockchain 101: What is Blockchain and How Does This Revolutionary Technology 
Work?WhatisBlockchainandHowDoesThisRevolutionaryTechnologyWork?In TransformingClimate 
FinanceandGreenInvestmentwithBlockchains.ElsevierInc.doi:10.1016/B978-0-12-814447-3.00003-3 

Monrat, A. A., Schelén, O., & Andersson, K. (2019). A survey of blockchain from the perspectives of 
applications, challenges, and opportunities. IEEE Access: Practical Innovations, Open Solutions, 7, 
117134–117151. doi:10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2936094 

Omar, I. A., Jayaraman, R., Salah, K., Simsekler, M. C. E., Yaqoob, I., & Ellahham, S. (2020). Ensuring 
protocol compliance and data transparency in clinical trials using Blockchain smart contracts. BMC 
Medical Research Methodology, 20(1), 1–17. doi:10.118612874-020-01109-5 PMID:32894068 

Omar, I. A., Jayaraman, R., Salah, K., Yaqoob, I., & Ellahham, S. (2020). Applications of Blockchain 
Technology in Clinical Trials: Review and Open Challenges. Arabian Journal for Science and Engineering. 
Advance online publication. doi:10.100713369-020-04989-3 

Petre, A., & Haï, N. (2018). Opportunités et enjeux de la technologie blockchain dans le secteur de la 
santé. Medecine Sciences, 34(10), 852–856. doi:10.1051/medsci/2018204 PMID:30451661 


Data Security in Clinical Trials Using Blockchain Technology 


PwC. (2018). A Prescription for Blockchain and Healthcare: Reinvent or be Reinvented. PriceWaterhouseCoopers, 
19. www.pwc.com/us/en/health-industries.html%0A© 

Radanović, I., & Likić, R. (2018). Opportunities for Use of Blockchain Technology in Medicine. Applied 
Health Economics and Health Policy, 16(5), 583–590. doi:10.100740258-018-0412-8 PMID:30022440 

Smetanin, S., Ometov, A., Komarov, M., Masek, P., & Koucheryavy, Y. (2020). Blockchain evaluation 
approaches: State-of-the-art and future perspective. Sensors (Switzerland), 20(12), 1–20. 
doi:10.339020123358 PMID:32545719 

Tan, L., Tivey, D., Kopunic, H., Babidge, W., Langley, S., & Maddern, G. (2020). Part 2: Blockchain 
technology in health care. ANZ Journal of Surgery, 90(12), 2415–2419. doi:10.1111/ans.16455 
PMID:33236489 

Tandon, A., Dhir, A., Islam, N., & Mäntymäki, M. (2020). Blockchain in healthcare: A systematic literature 
review, synthesizing framework and future research agenda. Computers in Industry, 122, 103290. 
Advance online publication. doi:10.1016/j.compind.2020.103290 

Wong, D. R., Bhattacharya, S., & Butte, A. J. (2019). Prototype of running clinical trials in an untrustworthy 
environment using blockchain. Nature Communications, 10(1), 1–8. doi:10.103841467-01908874-
y PMID:30796226 

Zhuang, Y., Sheets, L. R., Shae, Z., Chen, Y. W., Tsai, J. J. P., & Shyu, C. R. (2019). Applying Blockchain 
Technology to Enhance Clinical Trial Recruitment. AMIA ... Annual Symposium Proceedings. AMIA 
Symposium, 2019, 1276–1285. 

Zhuang, Yu., Sheets, L., Shae, Z., Tsai, J. J. P., & Shyu, C. R. (2018). Applying Blockchain Technology 
for Health Information Exchange and Persistent Monitoring for Clinical Trials. AMIA ... Annual 
Symposium Proceedings. AMIA Symposium, 2018, 1167–1175. 

KEY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 


Blockchain: A decentralized, distributed ledger technology that records the provenance of a digital 
asset. 

Clinical Trial: A research study performed in people that are aimed at evaluating a medical, surgical, 
or behavioral intervention. 

Data Security: The process of protecting data from unauthorized access and data corruption throughout 
all lifecycle. 

Decentralization: The transfer of control of an activity or organization to several local offices or 
authorities rather than one single one. 

Immutability: The state of not changing or being unable to be changed. 

Traceability: The quality of having an origin or course of development that may be found or followed 
throughout all lifecycle. 

Transparency: The quality of operating in such a way that it is easy for others to see what actions 
or changes are performed. 


