PERSPECTIVE 


published: 10 December 2019 
doi: 10.3389/fbloc.2019.00023 


Edited 
by: 


Dean Korošak, 
University of Maribor, Slovenia 

Reviewed 
by: 


Erika Beerbower, 
Independent Researcher, Denver, CO, 
United States 
Tomislav Lipic, 
Rudjer Boskovic Institute, Croatia 

*Correspondence: 


Philippe Ravaud 
philippe.ravaud@aphp.fr 

†Deceased 

Specialty 
section: 


This article was submitted to 

Blockchain for Science, 
a section of the journal 
Frontiers in Blockchain 

Received: 
16 July 2019 
Accepted: 
21 November 2019 
Published: 
10 December 2019 

Citation: 


Benchoufi M, Altman D and Ravaud P 
(2019) From Clinical Trials to Highly 
Trustable Clinical Trials: Blockchain in 
Clinical Trials, a Game Changer for 
Improving Transparency? 
Front. Blockchain 2:23. 
doi: 10.3389/fbloc.2019.00023 

From 
Clinical 
Trials 
to 
Highly 
Trustable 
Clinical 
Trials: 
Blockchain 
in 
Clinical 
Trials, 
a 
Game 
Changer 
for 
Improving 
Transparency? 


Mehdi Benchoufi1,2,3 , Doug Altman 4† and Philippe Ravaud1,2,3,5* 

1 METHODS Team, Center for Research in Epidemiology and Statistics Sorbonne Paris Cité (CRESS-UMR 1153), Paris, 
France, 2 Medical School, Paris Descartes University, Paris, France, 3 Center for Clinical Epidemiology, Hôtel-Dieu Hospital, 
Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris (AP-HP), Paris, France, 4 Center of Statistics in Medicine, University of Oxford, 
Oxford, United Kingdom, 5 Department of Epidemiology, Columbia University Mailman School of Public Health, New York, NY, 
United States 

The quality of clinical research is undermined by severe misconduct, error, and fraud, 
which are detrimental to the trust it should arouse. In this perspective article, we show 
how Blockchain may trace and control processes of clinical trials to prevent these issues 
or at least discourage them because they would become traceable and averted. Then, 
we propose a short and doable program in which, amid the complex stream of events in 
a clinical trial, we select sensitive and misconduct-prone steps that could greatly benefit 
from Blockchain by its simple core features such as traceability and incorruptibility of data 
registration or more refined automation tools called Smart Contracts. 

Keywords: 
clinical 
trials, 
Blockchain, 
transparency, 
reproducibility, 
traceability, 
frauds, 
quality 
of 
research, 
trusted 
data 


INTRODUCTION 


Trust is a pillar for societies. By no means does science, and in particular clinical research, 
escape this standard. Over the last years, scientific publications and media coverage about fraud, 
misconduct, detrimental research practices, lack of transparency, poor and selective reporting, 
and insufficient data-sharing have left the public and researchers confused about the trust they 
should have in clinical trials (George, 2015). Furthermore, from the viewpoint of civil society 
and academics, no longer can individual or private institutions (e.g., pharmaceutical company) or 
public institutions (e.g., hospital, university) be considered trustable by default. In short, one might 
say there is no trust; there is only proof of trust. 

Blockchain, a secure and distributed datastore or ledger of ordered records of transactions, 
with incorruptibility of the data as a core feature, is a good candidate to provide proof of trust1 
Such an approach could help improve the transparency and trustworthiness of clinical trials and 
benefit the whole clinical research ecosystem (Benchoufi and Ravaud, 2017; Eichler and Sweeney, 
2018; Gammon, 2018). In (Benchoufi and Ravaud, 2017; Benchoufi et al., 2017) we discussed the 
opportunities for applying Blockchain technologies to improve the quality of clinical trials; we 
also showed the complexity of the data streams involved in a clinical trial and how these can be 
traced by blockchain technologies. Here, we clarify the main principles of applying Blockchain to 
clinical trials, namely “time-stamping,” “time-ordering,” and “smart-contracting,” and we elaborate 
a hierarchy of applications of Blockchain keeping in mind concrete and deployable solutions. 
We define what we considered the main clinical trial sensitive points that may benefit from 

1http://scet.berkeley.edu/wp-content/uploads/BlockchainPaper.pdf. 

Frontiers in Blockchain | www.frontiersin.org 1 
December 2019 | Volume 2 | Article 23 


Benchoufi et al. Blockchain in Clinical Trials 

Blockchain application, describe them briefly but functionally, 
and classify them in terms of the above principles. Also, we detail 
the operational context enabling the application of Blockchain: 
architectural choices, governance model, and compliance with 
general data protection regulations. 

In fact, as much as open data has been an important social 
and scientific trend in the last decade, we consider that “trusted 
data” is a requirement for upcoming medical research datadriven 
assertions and that Blockchain represents the dedicated 
technological tool to concretize this approach, where, in the 
realm of health, clinical trials may become highly trustable. 

BLOCKCHAIN 
PROPERTIES 
AND 
SOME 
EXAMPLES 


Blockchain is a secure and distributed datastore or ledger of 
ordered records of transactions in which incorruptibility of 
the data is a core feature (Nakamoto, 2008). With Blockchain, 
network participants receive a copy of the datastore and 
can validate by consensus the transactions via a strong 
cryptographic process, so that trust in transaction validation 
becomes distributed throughout the network. Hence, parties that 
do not necessarily trust each other can interact without any 
third-party intervention, via a shared “tamper-proof” database. 
By contrast, centralized systems that are widely used datamanagement 
systems in clinical trials are single points of failure, 
do not provide strongly trustable traceability logs because they 
are controlled by a unique stakeholder and hence are both judge 
and party. 

Three core functionalities that might be fundamental to 
quality and transparency control in clinical studies can be 
derived from the technical properties of Blockchain: (1) timestamping: 
this data-integrity property implies secure, consistent 
and incorruptible proof-of-data storage; (2) time-ordering: event 
consistency allows for checking the integrity of all timeordered 
events; and (3) smart-contracting: quality and security 
of automated checking allows for automatically building quality 
work-streams called Smart Contracts, or pieces of computer 
scripts executing contractual clauses on which co-contracting 
parties agree. Smart Contracts are pipelines of conditioned 
events that look like “IF Condition 1 AND Condition 2 .. . 
AND Condition N (are met) THEN DO this ELSE DO that” 
(Wang et al., 2018). 

Blockchain technology applied to sensitive fields such as 
health is in its infancy, and in particular, as applied to clinical 
trials. In general, solutions are more at the stage of prototypes 
than being mature and ready to implement. One example of a live 
solution developed on top of a Blockchain is Embleema (https:// 
www.embleema.com/, accessed on September 30, 2019), which 
are distributed electronic health record systems implemented to 
grant patients more control over their data and even organize a 
data-brokerage market place. Another is the Blockchain-based 
drug verification system Mediledger, powered by Chronicled 
(https://www.chronicled.com/, accessed on September 30, 2019), 
which is a solution to track counterfeit drugs. A prototype of 
complete clinical trials performed on top of a Blockchain is 

TrialChain implemented via an original Blockchain architecture, 
where the state of private Blockchain is synchronized to the 
public Ethereum Blockchain (Dai et al., 2018; Wong et al., 2019). 
We refer to Agbo et al. (2019) for a recent systematic review of 
the current Blockchain technologies applied to healthcare. The 
interested reader will find therein a broad overview of Health’s 
fields in which Blockchain technologies are tested or deployed 
in live production, but there is no exclusive focus on clinical 
trials and no insights on the specific phases of clinical trials 
that should benefit from Blockchain. Besides, the examples that 
we brought above are by no means exhaustive, however further 
works would gain at offering a more systematic approach of 
such initiatives. 

BLOCKCHAIN 
TO 
IMPROVE 
THE 
TRUSTABILITY 
OF 
CLINICAL 
TRIALS 


Detrimental research practices can occur at every stage of a 
clinical trial, from the trial design to the report. Problems related 
to the poor reproducibility of clinical research have multiple 
examples in the scientific literature and are one of the greatest 
medical challenges of our time (Ioannidis, 2005; Mathieu et al., 
2009). Selected outcomes, switched outcomes or lack of datasharing 
are among the prominent issues (George and Buyse, 
2015; Goldacre et al., 2018; House of Commons Science and 
Technology Committee, 2018). One key fact is that part of the 
research misconduct is related to “after-the-fact” modifications, 
so that Blockchain is the guardian of the integrity of the existence 
of events and their correct chronological order but allows for 
their traceability, so it may be an interesting tool for improving 
research reproducibility. 

From a practical point of view, clinical trials may be seen 
as complex systems of intertwined data streams (Benchoufi and 
Ravaud, 2017) that may be corrupted by misconduct. We refer 
the reader to Figure 1 (an updated and extended version of 
Figure 1 in Benchoufi and Ravaud, 2017), which provides an 
overview of the key actors of clinical trials and the data streams 
in which they are involved, each of which may be subject to 
malpractice or errors. In Figure 2, for each main phase of a 
clinical trial, we provide key examples of Blockchain applications 
that may prevent some misconduct. This series of examples of 
Blockchain Time-stamping, Time-ordering, and Smart Contract 
functionalities may represent a roadmap. Here we mean by 
roadmap, a research and development program leading to the 
development of solutions for the cases that we consider sensitive 
and most likely to benefit from a Blockchain-type application, 
and that we fixed in Figure 1. 

Precisely, blockchain could be used to store proofs of data 
(e.g., proofs that a consent has been signed, Benchoufi et al., 
2017), metadata (e. g., different versions of the protocol, statistical 
analysis plan and source code) or the data themselves (e. g., data 
from an e-case report form). Let us consider randomization of 
a patient in a clinical trial before written consent: this violates 
basic ethical requirements and could be prohibited with a Smart 
Contract (Wang et al., 2018), such as “IF patient 1 signed consent 
form THEN DO allow patient 1 randomization by the central 

Frontiers in Blockchain | www.frontiersin.org 2 
December 2019 | Volume 2 | Article 23 


Benchoufi et al. Blockchain in Clinical Trials 

FIGURE1|Complex data workflow for a clinical trial encoded in Blockchain, with key stakeholders, and key phases. 
randomization system ELSE DO prohibit randomization.” The 
system records time-stamping and time-ordering of events, so 
a proof exists that consent was signed before randomization. 
Patients, investigators, sponsors, and regulators can obtain the 
corresponding right-ordered proofs of signed consents and 
randomization events. 

Furthermore, the clinical-trial data work-streams may benefit 
from secure, unalterable storage on the Blockchain, which can 
be remotely audited (Benchoufi and Ravaud, 2017). Metadata 
of a clinical trial could be attached so that these critical 
resources could be “compilable” as a software and provided 
to reviewers or regulatory authorities. One step further, data 
analysis could be opened to a third party and processed remotely, 
without breaching privacy (i.e., data remains stored locally), in a 
trackable way, which reinforces the credibility of claimed results. 
A transparency index of tracked events and Smart Contractvalidated 
work streams could be built. 

An ultimate evolution would be a Blockchain-powered 
repository of clinical trials with a standardized format, similar to 
how a medical image has its own format; i.e., the DICOM format, 
Graham et al., 2005). This repository could be used for data 
archiving and be “requestable” by using a dedicated search engine 

(Blockchain-as-a-service) for data-sharing and re-use (e.g., 
unpublished studies, individual patient data for meta-analyses). 

The architectural choices, though technical, have a structuring 
effect on the design of pertinent solutions and are strictly bound 
with high-level methodological choices. In practice, metadata 
and proof of data could reside in a public Blockchain via 
encrypted objects called hashes, whose integrity is verifiable 
by anyone. Personal data could be stored off chain or on a 
private blockchain decipherable only by agreed-upon parties. 
Although we advocate as much has possible the use of full 
public Blockchains because of their strong guarantees of data 
incorruptibility, private Blockchain solutions are popular; for 
instance, Hyperledger (Cachin, 2016) is a widely used private 
Blockchain. Use of private Blockchains may be legitimate for 
specific needs. However, when use of a private Blockchain 
cannot be avoided, hybrid solutions may offer good guarantees 
of reliability from a distributed network point of view and 
also combine the usability of private Blockchains. We draw 
attention to solutions such as Polkadot or the Cosmos 
network (Cosmos, 2019; Polkadot, 2019). The latter is not 
a Blockchain per se but rather an Inter-Blockchain protocol, 
enabling separate Blockchain services to communicate. This 

Frontiers in Blockchain | www.frontiersin.org 3 
December 2019 | Volume 2 | Article 23 


Benchoufi et al. Blockchain in Clinical Trials 

FIGURE2|Examples of Blockchain Time-stamping, Time-ordering, and Smart Contract functionalities applied to clinical trials. These functionalities may be used for 
the entire process. For example, proofs of consent are stored on the Blockchain, multiple versions of the consents are chained, and the last one is the reference for 
every trial site. Consent obtained before the inclusion can be documented: with a Smart Contract, one could proceed to randomization only under the condition that 
consent was obtained. The functionalities can be used for the protocol, for example, by keeping track of every version of the protocol or to document that decisions 
related to the protocol such as changing some judgment criteria before inclusion of patients. Functionalities can be used for disseminating the results (e.g., to prove 
that information related to the study results were sent to the study participants). The blockchain system keeps track of the “when” by time-stamping and the “who,” 
bound to a public key (i.e., the accredited person accessing and using any services that occur through blockchain transactions). 
scenario is interesting because constraints may force hosting 
services on private or public Blockchains, and these kinds of 
solutions bring a consistent layer of interoperability. With a 
different approach but with the aim at preserving at most the 
public character of Blockchain technologies, Dai et al. (2018) 
designed a system hosting sensitive interactions on a private 
Blockchain while maintaining the current state of the system on 
a public Blockchain. 

DISCUSSION 


Although Blockchain may help track more closely the series 
of events occurring in clinical trials and so help achieve better 
clinical research quality, it is not a solution that exhausts all 
the problems encountered when facing research reproducibility 
issues. For instance, some frauds such as complete data invention 
are not fully preventable by Blockchain, although such fraud 
would require cryptographic skills, and fraudulent data may be 
time-stamped and therefore trackable. 

We argued that Blockchain may lead to better reproducibility 
(Leek and Peng, 2015; National Academies of Sciences 
Engineering and Medicine, 2019). Blockchain technologies, 
by a close and highly trustable monitoring of potentially any 
events occurring in a clinical trial, the automated safeguard that 
may be derived from Smart Contracts allows for replicating the 
exact condition in which clinical trial processes were conducted, 
such as data analysis, and so lead to better reproducibility. 

In contrast, again tracked events, the tight control of the 
chronological order of the sequence of events, may raise 
the overall quality of processes and consequently is a strong 
consolidation for better replicability in a similar context. 

Moreover, storing proof-of-data on a public Blockchain 
has a cost, although these costs are quite negligible (https:// 
bitinfocharts.com/comparison/ethereum-transactionfees.html, 
accessed September 30, 2019) as compared with the overall cost 
of a clinical trial. There is an intense race between Blockchain 
solution providers to design “consensus mechanisms” that may 
enable the preservation of core Blockchain properties and high 
transaction validation efficiency at the same time so as to limit 
the cost of a single transaction (Baliga, 2017). The upcoming 
proof-of-stake protocol of the popular Ethereum platform is 
much anticipated (ethhub.io, 2019). Public Blockchain may also 
carry a cost in terms of security. Indeed, using a distributed 
network for clinical trials may seem counterintuitive because 
avoiding any breech of data privacy is mandatory in trials. 
However, Blockchain turns the openness of its network into an 
advantage: the lack of single node points of failure. It has been 
found quite resilient to security attacks and is constantly being 
improved (Li et al., in press). 

At a higher level, if Blockchain offers a wide range of 
technical tools that may consolidate the trustworthiness of 
clinical trials, these tools must be integrated with consistent and 
coherent governance. Hopefully, Blockchain technologies offer 
a way to design governance systems: public, permissioned or 

Frontiers in Blockchain | www.frontiersin.org 4 
December 2019 | Volume 2 | Article 23 


Benchoufi et al. Blockchain in Clinical Trials 

private Blockchains; open-or closed-source software and Smart 
Contracts; fixed or evaluative governance rules. Examples are 
separating data storage and proof-of-data storage, customizable 
data-sharing and data request systems, and tokenization if 
some user incentivization is pertinent. The ultimate distributed 
governance culminates in the idea of Distributed Automated 
Organization, whereby equal control is granted to each 
participant (Davidson et al., 2016). However, this concept is not 
well-suited for our needs because constantly evolving governance 
may instill uncertainty in the stability of the processes. These 
governance models in the realm of health must be designed 
in close coordination with the legal context, which varies 
from state to state. For instance, compliance with general data 
protection regulations has strong implications, mainly (1) reidentification 
issues because a proof of data, even shaped as 
a hash, is considered potentially re-identifying data as long as 
the raw data from which the hash was derived is stored on 
a database. In Europe, regarding storing proof-of-health data, 
some regulators in Europe recommend producing a risk analysis. 
Also, (2) the right to forget contradicts the append-only nature 
of the Blockchain data structure, from which no data can be 
overwritten. However, when the link between the hash and its 
raw data is deleted, then there is no issue for the hash to be stored 
as a persistent data, and since health data cannot not be stored 
beyond some time period depending on the state regulation, this 
problem becomes extinct with time (besides, such a data lifecycle 
could be taken care of by a Smart Contract). 

Importantly, standards for clinical trials remain to be 
consensually defined (e.g., public or permissioned Blockchain, 
user control of implementation model, open source practices); 
this work is ongoing through Institute of Electrical and 
Electronics Engineers initiatives to standardize the technology 
https://blockchain.ieee.org/standards). The growing interest in 
involvement in this technology by regulatory bodies such as the 
US Food and Drug Administration, pharmaceutical companies, 
and the clinical research community would also be crucial 
(Vahan, 2017; Colm, 2018). 

At last, let us mention that from a usability point of 
view, moving from proof of concept to production is always 
challenging, and real-life implementation will require managing 

REFERENCES 


Agbo, C. C., Mahmoud, Q. H., and Eklund, J. M. (2019). Blockchain 
technology in healthcare: a systematic review. Healthcare 7:56. 
doi: 10.3390/healthcare7020056 

Altman, D. G., Furberg, C. D., Grimshaw, J. M., and Shanahan, D. R. (2014). 
Linked publications from a single trial: a thread of evidence. Trials 15:s369. 
doi: 10.1186/1745-6215-15–369 

Baliga, A. (2017). Understanding Blockchain Consensus Models. Whitepaper. 
Retrieved from: https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/\penalty\z@da8a/ 
37b10bc1521a4d3de925d7ebc44bb606d740.pdf 

Benchoufi, M., Porcher, R., and Ravaud, P. (2017). Blockchain protocols in 
clinical trials: transparency and traceability of consent. F1000Res. 6:66. 
doi: 10.12688/f1000research.10531.1 

Benchoufi, M., and Ravaud, P. (2017). Blockchain technology for improving 
clinical research quality. Trials 18:335. doi: 10.1186/s13063-017-2035-z 

some technical complexity burdens such as acculturating actors 
to new processes and designing simple user experiences yet 
requiring some crypto literacy. This last point is of importance 
because how the user logs onto a Blockchain system and is 
provided a cryptographic pair of keys is still complex and is a 
strong brake on adoption. 

CONCLUSION 


Blockchain technology, if deployed in the context of clinical trials, 
will help build transparent, highly trustable trials, and deserves 
attention from the research community. Such technology applied 
to critical steps of clinical trials can improve the development of 
trusted processes and gathering data and reinforce transparency. 
However, the benefits of this technology is tempered by 
the cost of designing a layer of a complex technology, 
supposes the use of new skills, and more prospectively 
rethinking the clinical trial workflow as an achievable and 
wide generalization of the seminal idea of “threading trials” 
(Altman et al., 2014). Beyond this conceptual approach, a great 
amount of work remains in building automated workflows 
to ensure quality of clinical trial phases and implementing 
them concretely. 

AUTHOR 
CONTRIBUTIONS 


MB developed the theoretical formalism and designed the work. 
PR identified which of clinical-trial sensitive steps should be 
under the Blockchain validation process. PR and DA brought 
their expertise to consolidate the design of work and brought 
synthetic insights into challenges and limits of the proposed use 
of Blockchain and finally reviewed the article and approved the 
article. DA especially put in perspective the current work with 
former work of DA et al. on linked publications for a single 
trial (Vahan, 2017). 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 


We express our very great appreciation of the work of Elise Diard, 
who created the valuable figure presented here. 

Cachin, C. (2016). “Architecture of the hyperledger blockchain fabric,” in 

Workshop on Distributed Cryptocurrencies and Consensus Ledgers, Vol. 310 

(Chicago, IL), 4. 
Colm, H. (2018). Big Pharma and Blockchain: Setting a Standard with the IEEE. 

Available online at: https://www.blockchaintechnology-news.com; https:// 

www.blockchaintechnology-news.com/2018/01/04/big-pharma-blockchain


setting-standard-ieee/ 
Cosmos (2019). In Bitcoinwiki. Retrieved from: https://en.bitcoinwiki.org/wiki/ 

Cosmos (Accessed October 10, 2019). 
Dai, H., Young, H. P., Durant, T. J., Gong, G., Kang, M., Krumholz, 

H. M., et al. (2018). TrialChain: a blockchain-based platform to 
validate data integrity in large, biomedical research studies. arXiv 1807. 
03662. 
Davidson, S., De Filippi, P., and Potts, J. (2016). Disrupting Governance: The New 
Institutional Economics of Distributed Ledger Technology. Available online at: 
https://ssrn.com/abstract=2811995 

Frontiers in Blockchain | www.frontiersin.org 5 
December 2019 | Volume 2 | Article 23 


Benchoufi et al. Blockchain in Clinical Trials 

Eichler, H. G., and Sweeney, F. (2018). The evolution of clinical trials: can 
we address the challenges of the future?. Clin. Trials 15 (Suppl. 1), 27–32. 
doi: 10.1177/1740774518755058 

ethhub.io (2019). Proof of Stake (PoS.) Available online at: https://docs.ethhub.io/ 
ethereum-roadmap/ethereum-2.0/proof-of-stake/ 

Gammon, K. (2018). Experimenting with blockchain: can one technology boost 
both data integrity and patients’ pocketbooks?. Nat. Med. 24, 378–381. 
doi: 10.1038/nm0418-378 

George, S. (2015). Research misconduct and data fraud in clinical 
trials: prevalence and causal factors. Int. J. Clin. Oncol. 21, 15–21. 
doi: 10.1007/s10147-015-0887-3 

George, S. L., and Buyse, M. (2015). Data fraud in clinical trials. Clin. Investig. 5, 
161–173. doi: 10.4155/cli.14.116 

Goldacre, B., DeVito, N. J., Heneghan, C., Irving, F., Bacon, S., Fleminger, 
J., et al. (2018). Compliance with requirement to report results on the 
EU clinical trials register: cohort study and web resource. BMJ 362:k3218. 
doi: 10.1136/bmj.k3218 

Graham, R. N., Perriss, R. W., and Scarsbrook, A. F. (2005). DICOM demystified: a 
review of digital file formats and their use in radiological practice. Clin. Radiol. 
60, 1133–1140. doi: 10.1016/j.crad.2005.07.003 

House of Commons Science and Technology Committee (2018). Research 
Integrity: Clinical Trials Transparency. Tenth Report of Session. 2017–19 
Available online at: https://publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201719/cmselect/ 
cmsctech/1480/1480.pdf 

Ioannidis, J. P. (2005). Why most published research findings are false. PLoS Med. 
2:e124. doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.0020124 

Leek, J. T., and Peng, R. D. (2015). Opinion: reproducible research can still 
be wrong: adopting a prevention approach. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.U.S.A. 112, 
1645–1646. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1421412111 

Li, X., Jiang, P., Chen, T., Luo, X., and Wen, Q. (in press). A survey 
on the security of blockchain systems. Future Gen. Comput. Syst. 
doi: 10.1016/j.future.2017.08.020 

Mathieu, S., Boutron, I., Moher, D., Altman, D. G., and Ravaud, P. (2009). 
Comparison of registered and published primary outcomes in randomized 
controlled trials. JAMA 302, 977–984. doi: 10.1001/jama.2009.1242 

Nakamoto, S. (2008). Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System. Available 
online at: https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf 
National Academies of Sciences Engineering and Medicine (2019). Reproducibility 
and Replicability in Science. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. 

Polkadot (2019). In Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. Retrieved from: http:// 
fr.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Polkadot&oldid=163039276 (Accessed 
October 10, 2019). 

Vahan, S. (2017). Healthcare Data Exchange Framework (HDEF) Scalable Economy 
Of Secure Information And Services. Available online at: http://mdepinet.org/ 
wp-content/uploads/Simonyan_HDEF_MDEpiNet.pdf 

Wang, S., Yuan, Y., Wang, X., Li, J., Qin, R., and Wang, F. Y. (2018). “An overview 
of smart contract: architecture, applications, and future trends,” in 2018 IEEE 
Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV) (IEEE). Available online at: https://en. 
wikipedia.org/wiki/Smart_contract 

Wong, D. R., Bhattacharya, S., and Butte, A. J. (2019). Prototype 
of running clinical trials in an untrustworthy environment using 
blockchain. Nat. Commun. 10:917. doi: 10.1038/s41467-019-0 
8874-y 

Conflict of Interest: MB is a shareholder in Sunny Lake company, and is currently 
advising them for their medical strategy. SunnyLake is a company dedicated 
to empower citizens, leveraging Blockchain technology to improve patient 
engagement in clinical trials. 

The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of 
any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential 
conflict of interest. 

Copyright © 2019 Benchoufi, Altman and Ravaud. This is an open-access article 
distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). 
The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the 
original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original 
publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. 
No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these 
terms. 

Frontiers in Blockchain | www.frontiersin.org 6 
December 2019 | Volume 2 | Article 23 


