JMIR MEDICAL INFORMATICS Elangovan et al 

Review 

The Use of Blockchain Technology in the Health Care Sector: 
Systematic Review 

Deepa Elangovan1, BPharm (Hons); Chiau Soon Long2, BSc; Faizah Safina Bakrin1, PhD; Ching Siang Tan1, PhD; 
Khang Wen Goh3, PhD; Siang Fei Yeoh4, MClinPharm; Mei Jun Loy5, BEng (Hons); Zahid Hussain6, PhD; Kah Seng 
Lee7, PhD; Azam Che Idris8, PhD; Long Chiau Ming9, PhD 

1School of Pharmacy, KPJ Healthcare University College, Nilai, Malaysia 
2Faculty of Computing and Engineering, Quest International University, Ipoh, Malaysia 
3Faculty of Information Technology, INTI International University, Nilai, Malaysia 
4Department of Pharmacy, National University Hospital, Singapore, Singapore 
5Faculty of Engineering, Universiti Teknologi Malaysia, Skudai, Malaysia 
6Faculty of Health, University of Canberra, Canberra, Australia 
7Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Cyberjaya, Cyberjaya, Malaysia 
8Faculty of Integrated Technologies, Universiti Brunei Darussalam, Gadong, Brunei Darussalam 
9Pengiran Anak Puteri Rashidah Sa’adatul Bolkiah Institute of Health Sciences, Universiti Brunei Darussalam, Gadong, Brunei Darussalam 

Corresponding Author: 

Khang Wen Goh, PhD 
Faculty of Information Technology 
INTI International University 
Persiaran Perdana BBN Putra Nilai 
Nilai, 71800 
Malaysia 
Phone: 60 6 798 2000 
Email: khangwen.goh@newinti.edu.my 

Abstract 

Background: Blockchain technology is a part of Industry 4.0’s new Internet of Things applications: decentralized systems, 
distributed ledgers, and immutable and cryptographically secure technology. This technology entails a series of transaction lists 
with identical copies shared and retained by different groups or parties. One field where blockchain technology has tremendous 
potential is health care, due to the more patient-centric approach to the health care system as well as blockchain’s ability to connect 
disparate systems and increase the accuracy of electronic health records. 

Objective: The aim of this study was to systematically review studies on the use of blockchain technology in health care and 

to analyze the characteristics of the studies that have implemented blockchain technology. 
Methods: This study used a systematic review methodology to find literature related to the implementation aspect of blockchain 
technology in health care. Relevant papers were searched for using PubMed, SpringerLink, IEEE Xplore, Embase, Scopus, and 
EBSCOhost. A quality assessment of literature was performed on the 22 selected papers by assessing their trustworthiness and 
relevance. 

Results: After full screening, 22 papers were included. A table of evidence was constructed, and the results of the selected 
papers were interpreted. The results of scoring for measuring the quality of the publications were obtained and interpreted. Out 
of 22 papers, a total of 3 (14%) high-quality papers, 9 (41%) moderate-quality papers, and 10 (45%) low-quality papers were 
identified. 

Conclusions: Blockchain technology was found to be useful in real health care environments, including for the management 
of electronic medical records, biomedical research and education, remote patient monitoring, pharmaceutical supply chains, health 
insurance claims, health data analytics, and other potential areas. The main reasons for the implementation of blockchain technology 
in the health care sector were identified as data integrity, access control, data logging, data versioning, and nonrepudiation. The 
findings could help the scientific community to understand the implementation aspect of blockchain technology. The results from 
this study help in recognizing the accessibility and use of blockchain technology in the health care sector. 

https://medinform.jmir.org/2022/1/e17278 JMIR Med Inform 2022 | vol. 10 | iss. 1 | e17278 | p. 1 

(page number not for citation purposes) 

XSL•FO 

RenderX 


JMIR MEDICAL INFORMATICS Elangovan et al 
(JMIR Med Inform 2022;10(1):e17278) doi: 10.2196/17278 

KEYWORDS 

blockchain; health care; hospital information system; data integrity; access control; data logging; health informatics 

Introduction 

Health informatics (HI) is an extension of medical informatics 
that concentrates on the clinical sector and implementation of 
technology in the distribution of health care [1]. Changes in 
both technology and health care are leading to the evolution of 
health care informatics. With current technology, HI provides 
fundamental, indivisible knowledge bases to health professionals 
and health care organizations to provide patients with a better 
quality of care services [2]. Acquiring and recording medical 
and patient information, liaising with health care professionals, 
choosing an appropriate diagnostic method, elucidating 
laboratory findings, and gathering clinical research information 
are known as information processing and communication in the 
health care sector [3]. 

Electronic health record (EHR) systems and hospital information 
systems (HISs) are widely used across the world. However, the 
current HISs are mainly cloud based, are stored by one particular 
data contractor, and have several disadvantages, such as a lack 
of sufficient security measures. This has led to innumerable 
breaches of data, as well as issues of data validity and data 
sharing, which have left patients exposed to economic threats 
and possible social stigma. Centralized data or information is 
an appealing target for cyberattacks, and issues arise due to 
establishing a persistent view of the patient data across a 
network [4]. 

Taking these issues into consideration, an improved tamperproof 
and hackproof database management system is much needed 
to replace the current system that has been used for the past 
several decades. The new innovative system should have better 
data security and be able to integrate with other information 
technology (IT) systems, such as finance and admission systems. 
When blockchain technology was introduced in 2008, it largely 
fulfilled all of these criteria, alongside its versatility for 
applications in banking and finance. 

Blockchain is a decentralized database that maintains an 
uninterrupted, growing list of data records that are established 
by the nodes involved. The information is recorded in a public 
ledger that includes data from every completed transaction [5]. 
Along with this, blockchain is also a sort of dispersed ledger of 
cryptographically chained blocks where value-exchanged 
transactions are consecutively aggregated. Blockchain also 
exhibits properties such as decentralization, security, anonymity, 
and data integrity with the absence of a mediator to control 
agreement and inalterability [6]. The information in blockchain 
is transparent and tamperproof due to the continuous series of 
blocks, which contain information and data [7]. 

Blockchain is a decentralized database that is not owned by 
anybody and is simultaneously owned by everybody, as the 
contents are available to all parties involved. For example, with 
Bitcoin, since all transactions are processed by users via a 
particular pseudonym, the information contained in the 

blockchain is completely anonymous [8]. This revolutionary 
system has indeed overcome some of the limitations faced by 
the existing system. Nevertheless, further exploration in terms 
of implementation and practicality is much needed and will be 
discussed in the following sections [9]. 

This study aimed to systematically review studies on the use of 
blockchain technology in health care. We also analyzed the 
characteristics of the studies that have implemented blockchain 
technology. This study will be impactful in helping the scientific 
community to understand the use aspect of blockchain 
technology based on the findings of completed studies. The 
results from this study will help to identify the accessibility as 
well as the implementation of blockchain technology in the 
health care sector. 

Methods 

Study Design 

The methodology used in this research was a systematic review, 
modeled on a recent systematic review about blockchain 
reported by Böhme et al [7]. 

Data Sources and Search Strategy 

A search was conducted for scientific papers on the research 
topics. All papers that were relevant for these topics were 
gathered by using a search protocol that was developed for each 
scientific database. Possible keywords were tested, and 
appropriate terms were chosen for the search string. The Medical 
Subject Headings (MeSH) database was used to derive keywords 
and search term combinations. PubMed, SpringerLink, IEEE 
Xplore, Scopus, Embase, and EBSCOhost databases were chosen 
to search for all the relevant literature. The search strings were 
constructed in accordance with the research domains and 
research questions and are listed in Multimedia Appendix 1. 

Online digital libraries were used to search for relevant papers 
from January 2008 to September 2019. The year 2008 was 
chosen as the beginning of the range for this research study 
because the first published application of blockchain technology 
(ie, Bitcoin) was introduced in that year, so no 
blockchain-related studies were conducted before 2008. In this 
systematic review, the search query was purposely made broad, 
in order to identify many papers related to the research question. 
However, when “Bitcoin” was used as a search term, a large 
number of papers were identified, but the papers were mainly 
about economic applications rather than applications in the 
health care sector. 

Because the aim of this research was based on finding and 
mapping the papers related to blockchain technology in the 
health care sector, “Bitcoin” was dropped as a search term. By 
using “blockchain” and “health care” as search terms, the 
majority of Bitcoin-related papers with a technical perspective 
on blockchain were still included. A manual search was carried 

https://medinform.jmir.org/2022/1/e17278 JMIR Med Inform 2022 | vol. 10 | iss. 1 | e17278 | p. 2 

(page number not for citation purposes) 

XSL•FO 

RenderX 


JMIR MEDICAL INFORMATICS 

out for papers that were published at workshops, at conferences, 
in journals, and at symposiums. 

Study Selection 

Screening of Relevant Papers 

The next step in the process was screening relevant papers, 
wherein the papers that had been found during the previous step 
were assessed for actual relevance. The screening process started 
with all of the publications gathered from online digital libraries. 
A process inspired by Yli-Huumo et al [10] was used to screen 
for relevant papers. Applicable quotes from the search were 
entered into, and sorted with the aid of, EndNote X8.0 
(Clarivate), which was used to remove duplicate papers. 
Duplicate references across databases and references that were 
not appropriate for the study were eliminated from the literature 
search reference lists. The remaining duplicates were deleted 
manually. 

The iterative approach for title, abstract, and full-text searches 
was used, and the results were exported to Microsoft Excel 
2013. The titles and abstracts of the searched papers were 
screened first to determine the relevance or appropriateness for 
this systematic review. At this stage, studies that were clearly 
not about the use of blockchain technology in health care were 
excluded. The titles and abstracts were screened by two 
reviewers based on the inclusion and exclusion criteria. 

Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria 

The papers that had passed the previous screening phase were 
screened based on their abstract. In addition, the following 
specific inclusion and exclusion criteria were used to screen 
each paper: 

1. Inclusion criteria: 
a. Original research study. 
b. Study in English. 
c. Publication on blockchain technology in the health care 
sector. 
d. Publication including sufficient explanation of the 
research findings. 
2. Exclusion criteria: 
a. Papers without full-text availability. 
b. Papers for which English was not the main language. 
c. Papers that had some other focus instead of the use of 
blockchain in the health care sector. 
d. Papers that were duplicates. 
e. Search results that were editorials, prefaces, paper 
summaries, summaries of tutorials, interviews, news 
items, correspondences, discussions, comments, 
readers’letters, workshops, panels, and poster sessions. 
f. Publications indicating ideas, magazine publications, 
and discussion papers. 
Abstract Screening Based on Keywords 

Screening based on keywords, as defined by Dyba and Dingsøyr 
[11], was done in two steps. In the first step, identifiable 
keywords and concepts from the abstracts were analyzed that 
reflected the contribution of the papers. Developing a greater 

https://medinform.jmir.org/2022/1/e17278 

XSL•FO 

RenderX 

Elangovan et al 

level of understanding based on these keywords was the second 
step in this keywording process. 

The keywords were used to cluster and form categories. All the 
selected papers were read after the categories had been clustered. 
The categories were updated after reading each paper, or if the 
paper revealed something new, then a new category was created. 
This step resulted in clustered categories being formed from all 
the relevant papers based on this research topic. Papers with 
poor, misleading, or lost abstracts were excluded due to 
irrelevant information. 

After the title-, abstract-, and keyword-screening process, each 
remaining paper underwent full-text screening based on the 
same eligibility criteria. Two reviewers resolved discrepancies 
through discussion, and no adjudication by a third reviewer was 
required. 

Data Gathering and Data Extraction 

A template was designed to collect the information required to 
address the research question. Basic metadata about the 
publication were collected, such as author name and country, 
year of publication, source type, and type of publisher. 

To categorize the 22 selected papers, further data were extracted. 
Each full paper was read to extract the keywords or outcomes 
related to our research question; these were then sorted into the 
identified categories, as follows: 

1. Use cases of blockchain technology in health care that 
indicate the specific health care area, such as electronic 
medical records (EMRs), biomedical research and 
education, remote patient monitoring, drug or 
pharmaceutical supply chains, health insurance claims, 
health data analytics, or other areas. 
2. Reasons for using blockchain technology in health care, 
such as data integrity, access control, logging, data 
versioning, and nonrepudiation. 
Literature Quality Assessment 

An assessment of literature quality was performed. All of the 
final 22 publications were independently reviewed and scored 
by two reviewers. The assessment tool for blockchain-related 
studies proposed by Petersen et al [12] was used to critically 
appraise and summarize evidence in the searched papers. 

In accordance with Hölbl et al [13], the quality of the papers 
was assessed using the criteria defined in Table 1. 

This tool was used to assess the trustworthiness, relevance, and 
results of the published papers. These led to the decision of 
which papers were believable and useful and could be used for 
the research. A three-tier scale was used to rank the quality of 
all four questions. A value of 0 (“barely” or “no”) was assigned 
when the criterion was addressed very poorly or not at all, a 
value of 1 (“partially”) was assigned when a criterion was 
partially addressed, and a value of 2 (“satisfactorily” or “yes”) 
was assigned when the reviewer felt that the publication had 
successfully satisfied the criterion. 

Two reviewers assessed each query from question 1 (Q1) to 
question 4 (Q4), which resulted in a minimum of 0 points to a 
maximum of 4 points per query. The minimum score for the 

JMIR Med Inform 2022 | vol. 10 | iss. 1 | e17278 | p. 3 

(page number not for citation purposes) 


JMIR MEDICAL INFORMATICS 

sum of responses to question 2 (Q2), question 3 (Q3), and Q4 
was 0 points, and the maximum score was 12 points. The score 
of the response to Q1 was converted to 40% of the total value, 
and the total summed score of responses to Q2, Q3, and Q4 was 
converted to 60% of the total value, with Q2, Q3, and Q4 each 
contributing 20% of the total points. 

So, the overall score was the sum of responses to Q1 to Q4, 
which is presented as a percentage to enhance readability and 
comprehension. An explanation of scoring of responses to 
queries Q1 to Q4 is given in Table 1. 

To find the percentage score of the response to Q1, the following 
equation applies: 


Table 1. Parameters for measuring quality of the publications [13]. 
Question (Q) Quality assessment query 
Q1 Is the publication relevant to blockchain? 

Elangovan et al 

To find the percentage score for the sum of responses to Q2 to 
Q4, the following equation applies: 


The overall score is represented by the following equation: 
Overall score = Percentage score of response to Q1 (%) + 
Percentage score of sum of responses to Q2 to Q4 (%) [13]. 

From the calculation, the publications that have an overall score 
of 90% and above are high-quality papers. An overall score 
between 80% and 89% indicates a moderate-quality paper, and 
low-quality papers are represented by an overall score of 79% 
or less. 


Responses (scores) 


“barely” (0), “partially” (1), or “satisfactorily” (2) 

Q2 Does the publication include and define research objectives adequately? “no” (0), “partially” (1), or “yes” (2) 

Q3 Are limitations and challenges well defined? 
Q4 Is the proposed contribution well described? 

Data Availability 

All data have been reported in this manuscript. 

Results 


Study Selection 

A total of 271 papers were initially retrieved as a result of 
implementation of the search protocol that was designed for 
searching the selected scientific databases. Of the 271 papers, 
34 (12.5%) were from PubMed, 52 (19.2%) were from 
SpringerLink, 40 (14.8%) were from IEEE Xplore, 56 (20.7%) 
were from Embase, 45 (16.6%) were from Scopus, and 44 
(16.2%) were from EBSCOhost. Then, the first screening was 
done based on the titles of the retrieved papers. All of the paper 
titles were examined independently by one reviewer based on 
the inclusion and exclusion criteria, which led to the selection 
of 175 papers. In the first screening, a total of 52 papers were 
excluded because they were not related to the research topic 
(eg, some excluded papers discussed the business perspective 
of Bitcoin rather than the use of blockchain technology in the 
health care sector). Meanwhile, 25 papers related to other 
scientific areas, such as mathematics and chemistry, were 
excluded from the first screening, as the term “blockchain” had 
other meanings apart from the technology used in computer 
science and IT. Through a manual search and using references 
from the included papers, an additional 10 papers were collected. 

“no” (0), “partially” (1), or “yes” (2) 

“no” (0), “partially” (1), or “yes” (2) 

After the selection of 185 papers from the first screening, 87 
duplicate papers were removed using Endnote X8. This resulted 
in 98 papers, which underwent further screening based on 
abstracts where, in some cases, the introduction and conclusion 
of the full text were analyzed. The abstracts of all the selected 
papers were read by two reviewers. Some of the papers were 
removed because the abstracts indicated no relevance to the 
research topic. The unclear or grey-area abstracts or papers were 
moved to the next screening step for more in-depth analysis. 

A total of 35 papers were identified for full-paper analysis, 
which was the last stage of paper selection for this systematic 
review. Each paper was read in full, independently, and assessed 
for eligibility using the inclusion and exclusion criteria. This 
resulted in the selection of 22 primary papers. Of the 35 papers 
identified for full-text analysis, 3 (9%) were dropped because 
they focused on the economic perspective of Bitcoin and not 
the health care setting. Of the 35 papers, 5 (14%) were removed 
as they only described blockchain and how it works, without 
discussing any actual blockchain implementation in a real health 
care environment. Furthermore, 3 out of 35 (9%) papers 
identified as review papers and 2 (6%) papers identified as 
proposal papers were removed. Figure 1 shows the results of 
the search strategy. The list of 22 selected primary papers and 
the extracted data items are included in Table 2 [14-35]. The 
PRISMA (Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews 
and Meta-Analyses) checklist for this research study on the use 
of blockchain technology in the health care sector is included 
in Multimedia Appendix 2. 

https://medinform.jmir.org/2022/1/e17278 JMIR Med Inform 2022 | vol. 10 | iss. 1 | e17278 | p. 4 

(page number not for citation purposes) 

XSL•FO 

RenderX 


JMIR MEDICAL INFORMATICS Elangovan et al 

Figure 1. PRISMA (Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses) flowchart of the search strategy. 


https://medinform.jmir.org/2022/1/e17278 JMIR Med Inform 2022 | vol. 10 | iss. 1 | e17278 | p. 5 

(page number not for citation purposes) 

XSL•FO 

RenderX 


JMIR MEDICAL INFORMATICS Elangovan et al 
Table 2. Information extracted and collected from the selected papers. 


Study first Location Use cases and fields Usability and reasons for using blockchain Technology 
author, year 
Simplified classi-
Application area Description fication Description 


Maslove, Kingston, Cana-Biomedical re-Development of a system Data integrity Enabling of clinical trials data Ethereum 
2018 [14] da search and educathat 
uses a web-based inmanagement; 
functions allow 
tion (ie, clinical triterface 
to allow users to patients to grant researchers 
als) run trial-related smart access to their data and allow 
contracts on an Ethereum researchers to submit queries 
network for data that are stored offchain 
Cunning-The Nether-Electronic medical A system that uses smart Access control Improvement of the uptake and Ethereum 
ham, 2017 lands record (EMR) contract–based Ethereum acceptance of medical informat[
18] blockchain technology to ics platforms where patients 
operate in a verifiably directly control medical data in 
secure, trustless, and an open and secure manner 
openly auditable environment 
Nugent, London, the Biomedical re-A system that uses smart Data integrity Improvement of data transparen-Ethereum 
2016 [29] United Kingsearch 
and educacontracts, 
which enhance and logging cy in clinical trials and imdom 
tion (ie, clinical trithe 
trust in the data and mutable records of trial history, 
als) clinical trials; this rewhich 
act as trusted administraduces 
patient risk and fitors; 
tamper-resistant characternancial 
strain in health istics of blockchain prevent all 
care by allowing betterforms 
of manipulation; mainly 
informed decisions to be used for complex clinical trial 
made by medical profesmanagement 
sionals 
Benchoufi, 
2017 [15] 
Paris, France Biomedical research 
and educa-
A system with timestamping 
of each pa-
Nonrepudiation, 
logging, and data 
All consent-related data on the 
blockchain enhance security, 
N/Aa 
tion (ie, clinical tritient’s 
consent using versioning reliability, and transparency 
als) blockchain technology in and could be a consistent step 
a securely unfalsifiable toward reproducibility 
and transparent way 
Ichikawa, Tokyo, Japan Remote patient Development of a smart-Data integrity Establishment of accessibility Hyperledger 
2017 [16] monitoring (ie, phone app with and transparency of data with-Fabric 
mobile health blockchain technology to out the third party by incorpo[
mHealth]) provide an mHealth sysrating 
blockchain technology 
tem for cognitive behavinto 
mHealth; blockchain also 
ioral therapy for insomserves 
as a tamperproof system 
nia for mHealth 
Cichosz, Aalborg, Den-EMR (ie, health Development of a plat-Access control Improvement in privacy and NEM 
2018 [25] mark care data) form using the New and data integrity diabetes data management, 
Economy Movement where patients have access to 
(NEM) multi-signature control and share their own data 
blockchain contracts to 
access data management, 
sharing, and encryption 
Omar, 2019 The United EMR Development of a pa-Data integrity Patients will have overall con-N/A 
[26] States tient-centric health care trol over their data; Meddata 
management system iBchain increases patients’ inusing 
blockchain technolterest 
in EMRs or electronic 
ogy as storage, which enhealth 
records and enhances 
hances privacy accountability, integrity, 
pseudonymity, security, and 
privacy 


https://medinform.jmir.org/2022/1/e17278 JMIR Med Inform 2022 | vol. 10 | iss. 1 | e17278 | p. 6 

(page number not for citation purposes) 

XSL•FO 

RenderX 


JMIR MEDICAL INFORMATICS Elangovan et al 


Study first Location Use cases and fields Usability and reasons for using blockchain Technology 
author, year 
Simplified classi-
Application area Description fication Description 


Liang, 2017 Norfolk, Eng-Remote patient Development of an Data integrity, Improvement of personal health Hyperledger 
[30] land monitoring mHealth care system for access control, data collection, sharing, valida-Fabric 
personal health data coland 
logging tion, protection, and integrity 
lection, sharing, and coland 
health care collaboration; 
laboration between indithis 
system ensures the scalabilviduals, 
health care ity and efficiency of the data 
providers, and insurance process by handling a large data 
companies, and its impleset 
at low latency 
mentation in a distributed 
and trustless way 
Kleinaki, The Nether-Biomedical re-Presentation and testing Data integrity Improvement of retrieved data Ethereum 
2018 [28] lands search and educaof 
the use of smart digital and data versionintegrity, 
nonrepudiation, and 
tion (ie, database contracts by a ing biomedical evidence data verqueries) 
blockchain-based notasioning 
rization service to seal a 
biomedical database 
query using a real 
blockchain infrastructure 
Bocek, 2017 Zurich, Switzer-Pharmaceutical Implementation of sensor Logging This system can be evaluated Ethereum 
[32] land supply chain (ie, devices using blockchain automatically, and the stored 
ambient temperatechnology 
to enhance data are tamperproof with 
ture) data immutability and Ethereum, which can be used 
public accessibility of at a low cost 
temperature records 
Mendes, Évora, Portugal EMR Development of a system Data integrity While consuming low computa-Hyperledger 
2018 [22] with raw blockchain with tional power, it enhances tam-Fabric 
Hyperledger Fabric by perproof, fair, and democratic 
DLA maintenance of the ledger 
Li, 2018 [20] Beijing, China EMR (ie, health Development of a novel Data integrity Preservation of important data Ethereum 
record) blockchain-based data in perpetuity and verification 
preservation system of data originality; illegal operbased 
on the real-world ation of the data is detected, 
blockchain-based platand 
the user is notified on time 
form, and its implementation 
for medical data 
Azaria, 2016 The United EMR (ie, health Development of a decen-Logging and ac-The system becomes more Ethereum 
[17] States record) tralized record managecess 
control convenient and adaptable in its 
ment system using management of authentication, 
blockchain technology to confidentiality, accountability, 
handle EMRs and data sharing 
Zhou, 2018 Beijing, China Health insurance Development of a Data integrity The system provides decentral-Ethereum 
[33] claims blockchain-based mediand 
logging ization and tamper resistance; 
cal insurance storage this gives users high credibility 
system, MIStore; this and record-nodes, which help 
helps insurance compausers 
verify publicly verifiable 
nies obtain patients’ data 
medical spending 
records, which are always 
confidential 
Angeletti, Rome, Italy Biomedical re-Presentation of a digital Data integrity The clinical research institute Ethereum 
2017 [27] search and educahealth 
application enand 
access concan 
be guaranteed that it is action 
(ie, clinical triabling 
clinical trials retrol 
quiring useful and original data; 
als) cruitment using Internet until an agreement is reached, 
of Things data; using the individual can keep person-
Ethereum, a proof of al data private 
concept was implemented, 
and the application’s 
performance was studied 
in a real-world evaluation 


https://medinform.jmir.org/2022/1/e17278 JMIR Med Inform 2022 | vol. 10 | iss. 1 | e17278 | p. 7 

(page number not for citation purposes) 

XSL•FO 

RenderX 


JMIR MEDICAL INFORMATICS Elangovan et al 


Study first Location Use cases and fields Usability and reasons for using blockchain Technology 

author, year 

Simplified classi-
Application area Description fication Description 


Saravanan, Chennai, India Remote patient Implementation of a new Access control The system aids in data storage Ethereum 
2017 [31] monitoring health care paradigm for millions of patients, and 
(SMEADb) to aid diabetic 
patients via development 
of an end-to-end 
analysis was performed in real 
time, which promotes an evidence-
based medicine system 
secured system; implewith 
privacy and security conmentation 
of a cerns 
blockchain-based disruptive 
technology to facilitate 
cryptographic security 
and formalized data 
access through smart 
contracts 
Zhang, 2018 The United EMR (ie, health Development of a system Access control Improvement of security, trust, Ethereum 
[24] States record) to support collaborative and data integrity and scalable data sharing, 
clinical decision-making which is important for collabovia 
a remote tumor board rative clinical decision-making; 
case study also results in greater data 
readability 
Fan, 2018 China EMR (ie, health Development of a Access control Patients can easily access the N/A 
[19] record) blockchain-based infor-EMRs of different hospitals; 
mation management sysdata 
sharing via blockchain 
tem, MedBlock, to hanhelps 
the hospital get a full hisdle 
patients’ information; tory of patients’medical history 
this allows for efficient before consultations are carried 
EMR access and reout 
trieval, exhibiting high 
information security 
Liu, 2018 China EMR Implementation of Access control The EMRs cannot be modified N/A 
[21] blockchain-based privaarbitrarily, 
which leads to recy-
preserving data sharduced 
medical data leakage; 
ing for EMRs security analysis shows that this 
system is a secure and effective 
way to realize data sharing for 
EMRs 
Nagasubra-London, the EMR Ensuring secrecy of digi-Access control The system ensures data trans-N/A 
manian, United Kingtal 
signatures and authenparency, 
privacy, confidentiali2018 
[23] dom tication by using keyless ty, and verification of data 
signature infrastructure 
in the system 
Kotsiuba, Ukraine Health care data Implementation of a de-Data integrity Enhancement of medical data N/A 
2018 [34] analytics centralized system with safety, extension of the base of 
blockchain technology clinical data collection, and 
that protects the confidencreation 
of an effective shared 
tiality of medical data; health infrastructure 
patients receive a personal 
data monitoring tool, 
allowing them to participate 
in accelerating medical 
analytics 
Talukder, The United Others Implementation of an Access control Aids in achieving all the com-Ethereum 
2018 [35] States Ethereum-based Proof of and data integrity plex needs of P6 (participatory, 
Disease consensus protopersonalized, 
proactive, prevencol 
to enhance the accurative, 
predictive, and precision) 
cy of transactions and medicine and decreases disease 
eliminate medical errors burden 


aN/A: not applicable: the technology was not reported in this paper. 
bSMEAD: Secured Mobile-Enabled Assisting Device for Diabetics. 

https://medinform.jmir.org/2022/1/e17278 JMIR Med Inform 2022 | vol. 10 | iss. 1 | e17278 | p. 8 

(page number not for citation purposes) 

XSL•FO 

RenderX 


JMIR MEDICAL INFORMATICS 

Publication Year, Publication Type, and Geographical 
Distribution 

All the selected papers were published since 2016. This indicates 
that blockchain technology in health care settings is very new. 
It is noted that from the 22 selected papers, the majority (n=12, 
55%) were published in 2018, 7 (32%) papers were published 
in 2017, 2 (9%) papers were published in 2016, and 1 (5%) 
paper was published in 2019. 

The locations (ie, countries) of the institutions of the authors of 
the selected primary papers were used to distinguish the 
geographical distribution of the research community members 
who were involved in the research. If a paper had authors from 
different countries, the country of the corresponding author was 
used. It is noted that the authors, universities, and companies 
in the United States and China were leading, having 4 (18%) 
papers each. This was followed by the United Kingdom with 3 
(14%) papers and the Netherlands with 2 (9%) papers. The rest 
of the countries, namely Ukraine, India, Italy, Portugal, 
Switzerland, Denmark, Japan, France, and Canada, contributed 
1 (5%) paper each. This geographical distribution of the 22 
selected papers indicates that blockchain technology in the 
health care sector has gathered research interest around the 
world. 

The channels where the papers were published determined the 
publication type. The two publication types included in this 
systematic review were conferences and journals. The majority 
(n=15, 68%) of the 22 selected primary papers were published 
in journals, while 7 (32%) were published as conference 
proceedings. 

The 22 selected primary papers were studied, and the data or 
keywords related to this systematic review’s question were 
extracted. A classification scheme was constructed based on 
the iterative identification of data, charting keywords extracted 
from the selected papers. The papers were then sorted into 
identified categories. 

Each of the selected primary papers addressed one or more 
different aspects of the use cases of blockchain technology in 
the health care sector. Therefore, the identified use cases were 
used to further classify the selected papers. Out of 22 selected 
papers, 10 (45%) addressed the application of blockchain in the 
management of EMRs, 5 (23%) addressed the use of blockchain 
technology in biomedical research and education, and 3 (14%) 
demonstrated the use of blockchain technology in remote patient 
monitoring. The remaining papers addressed the use of 
blockchain technology in drug or pharmaceutical supply chains 
(n=1, 5%), health insurance claims (n=1, 5%), health data 
analytics (n=1, 5%), and other applications (n=1, 5%). 

In the selected primary papers, blockchain was implemented in 
the real health care environment to address several information 
security components. The use of blockchain technology or the 
main reason it was implemented in health care was classified. 

Elangovan et al 

From this data, it was noted that each of the selected primary 
papers addressed one or more reasons, out of a total of 34 
reasons or benefits, for using blockchain technology in health 
care. Most papers addressed the application of blockchain in 
health care for data integrity (14/34, 41%). The next largest 
purpose of blockchain application was access control, which 
contributed 11 out of 34 (32%) reasons in the papers. 
Meanwhile, data logging was addressed 6 (18%) times, data 
versioning was addressed 2 (6%) times, and nonrepudiation 
was addressed 1 (3%) time. 

The setting of the studies, specifically the type of hospital used 
for the implementation of blockchain technology, was analyzed 
among the 22 selected papers. Only 3 out of 22 (14%) papers 
gave the name of hospital where the study was carried out. 
Maslove et al [14] implemented a blockchain-based smart 
contract at Kingston General Hospital, Canada, to study how 
blockchain technology could be used in clinical trial data 
management, which could enhance data integrity. Another study 
on clinical trials data management was conducted by Benchoufi 
et al [15] at Hospital Hôtel Dieu, Paris, France, which looked 
at whether the implementation of blockchain could enhance the 
transparency and traceability of clinical trial consent, thereby 
benefitting both patients and researchers. Ichikawa et al [16] 
conducted their study at the Institute of Neuropsychiatry, Seiwa 
Hospital, Tokyo, Japan, using blockchain technology to 
implement a tamper-resistant mobile health (mHealth) system, 
which could enhance both data transparency and accessibility 
without the involvement of a third party. 

Information regarding the blockchain platform that was used 
was gathered from the 22 selected papers. Ethereum was the 
most commonly used blockchain platform (n=12, 55%), 
followed by Hyperledger Fabric (n=3, 14%), while the least 
used platform was the New Economy Movement (NEM) 
blockchain platform (n=1, 5%). The rest of the studies did not 
state which blockchain platform was used. 

Literature Quality Analysis 

The final and crucial part of this systematic review involved 
reviewers scoring the 22 papers to evaluate their quality and 
the relevance of the blockchain usage. The scoring results are 
shown in Table 3 [14-35]. These show a greater quality of 
average overall scores among 15 journal papers (mean score 
81.0%, SD 5.8%) compared to 7 conference papers (mean score 
77.1%, SD 5.9%). Out of the 22 papers, 3 (14%) high-quality 
papers, 9 (41%) moderate-quality papers, and 10 (45%) 
low-quality papers were identified. It is noted that no published 
conference papers from January to September 2019 were found 
or included in this study. 

The 2 (9%) papers published in 2016 each had a relatively high 
average overall score. In 2017, the average overall score of the 
papers was 80%, which was slightly lower than that of 2016. 
This dropped to 78% in 2018 and rose again to 80% in 2019. 

https://medinform.jmir.org/2022/1/e17278 JMIR Med Inform 2022 | vol. 10 | iss. 1 | e17278 | p. 9 

(page number not for citation purposes) 

XSL•FO 

RenderX 


JMIR MEDICAL INFORMATICS Elangovan et al 

Table 3. Summary of scores for measuring quality of the publications. 


Study first author, year Type of publication Points per question (Q)a Sum of 
scores for 
Overall score for 
Q1-Q4 (%), mean 
Quality of paperb 
Q2-Q4 (SD) 
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 


Maslove, 2018 [14] Journal 4 3 3 4 10 90.0 (0.5) High 
Benchoufi, 2017 [15] Journal 4 3 2 3 8 80.0 (0.7) Moderate 
Ichikawa, 2017 [16] Conference proceeding 4 4 2 3 9 85.0 (0.8) Moderate 
Azaria, 2016 [17] Journal 4 3 2 3 8 80.0 (0.7) Moderate 
Cunningham, 2017 [18] Journal 4 3 2 4 9 85.0 (0.8) Moderate 
Fan, 2018 [19] Journal 4 3 1 3 7 75.0 (1.1) Low 
Li, 2018 [20] Conference proceeding 4 3 2 4 9 85.0 (0.8) Moderate 
Liu, 2018 [21] Journal 4 3 2 2 7 75.0 (0.8) Low 
Mendes, 2018 [22] Journal 4 3 1 3 7 75.0 (1.1) Low 
Nagasubramanian, 2018 [23] Journal 4 3 2 3 8 80.0 (0.7) Moderate 
Zhang, 2018 [24] Journal 4 3 1 3 7 75.0 (1.1) Low 
Cichosz, 2018 [25] Journal 4 4 2 3 9 85.0 (0.8) Moderate 
Omar, 2019 [26] Conference proceeding 4 3 1 3 7 75.0 (1.1) Low 
Angeletti, 2017 [27] Journal 4 4 2 4 10 90.0 (0.9) High 
Kleinaki, 2018 [28] Journal 4 3 1 3 7 75.0 (1.1) Low 
Nugent, 2016 [29] Journal 4 4 2 4 10 90.0 (0.9) High 
Liang, 2017 [30] Conference proceeding 4 3 1 3 7 75.0 (1.1) Low 
Saravanan, 2017 [31] Journal 4 3 1 3 7 75.0 (1.1) Low 
Bocek, 2017 [32] Journal 4 4 1 4 9 85.0 (1.3) Moderate 
Zhou, 2018 [33] Conference proceeding 4 4 1 3 8 80.0 (1.2) Moderate 
Kotsiuba, 2018 [34] Conference proceeding 4 3 1 2 6 70.0 (1.1) Low 
Talukder, 2018 [35] Conference proceeding 4 3 0 3 6 70.0 (1.5) Low 


aTwo reviewers assessed each query from Q1 to Q4, based on a 5-point ordinal scale ranging from 0 to 4, where 0 indicates the lowest level (criterion 

was addressed very poorly or not at all) and 4 indicates the highest level (criterion was exceptional). 
bAn overall score of ≥90% indicates a high-quality paper; an overall score of 80%-89% indicates a moderate-quality paper; an overall score ≤79% 
indicates a low-quality paper. 

Discussion 

Identified Themes 

The identified themes are summarized in Figure 2. 

https://medinform.jmir.org/2022/1/e17278 JMIR Med Inform 2022 | vol. 10 | iss. 1 | e17278 | p. 10 

(page number not for citation purposes) 

XSL•FO 

RenderX 


JMIR MEDICAL INFORMATICS Elangovan et al 

Figure 2. The uses of blockchain technology in the health care sector. 


The Use of Blockchain Technology in Real Health Care 
Environments 

The results from this systematic review show that the majority 
of the research regarding blockchain technology in health care 
environments was focused on the management of EMRs, 
followed by biomedical research and education, remote patient 
monitoring, pharmaceutical supply chains, health insurance 
claims, health data analytics, and other potential areas. 

Electronic Medical Records 

Out of 22 selected papers, 10 (45%) concentrated on the 
management of EMRs. EMRs, similar to EHRs or personal 
health records, involve electronic modeling, storage, and 
management of patients’ personal, medical, or health-related 
data. Traditionally, different systems have been used to store 
patients’ records separately across different service providers, 
where the service providers have control over the records, which 
may limit data sharing with other health care stakeholders. 

The application of blockchain in the management of EHRs will 
make data sharing among health care stakeholders easier, more 
transparent, and more trustworthy, and patients will have control 
over their own data. This is because the characteristics of 
blockchain technology, such as decentralization, immutability, 
data provenance, reliability, robustness, smart contracts, security, 
and privacy, make it suitable for the management and storage 
of patient EHRs [18]. 

Azaria et al [17] presented MedRec, which is a project from the 
MIT (Massachusetts Institute of Technology) Media Lab and 
Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center that uses a 
blockchain-based platform to give patients access to their own 
data through some access permissions built into the blockchain. 
The patient may decide to grant access to their EHRs to any 
third party, which may reduce their paperwork, given that 
patients normally have to carry a bundle of papers with them 
when they seek out different health care providers for 

https://medinform.jmir.org/2022/1/e17278 

XSL•FO 

RenderX 

consultation. With blockchain technology, regardless of the 
time and institution, health care providers can easily gain access 
to all of a patient’s medical data. Patients become more 
committed to their own health care because they are directly 
involved in the management of their health records through 
blockchain technology. 

The second application that would integrate EMRs is 
blockchain-based privacy-preserving data sharing (BPDS), 
which was developed by Liu et al [21]. This uses the Ethereum 
blockchain platform, which reduces the risk of medical data 
leakage and secures data sharing in health care. 

Fan et al [19] developed MedBlock, a blockchain-based 
information management system that is implemented in health 
care to enhance efficiency and secure electronic medical data 
sharing using blockchain. Another blockchain-based EMR is 
FHIRChain [24], which encapsulates the Health Level Seven 
Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resources (FHIR) standard for 
shared clinical data. Zhang et al [24] used blockchain technology 
via the FHIRChain-based decentralized app to share clinical 
data that focused on health care record management and digital 
health identities to verify participants for remote cancer care in 
a case study of collaborative decision-making [24]. Cichosz et 
al [25] proposed NEM multi-signature blockchain contracts to 
be used for the management and sharing of medical data of 
diabetes patients, which aimed to achieve access control and 
data privacy. 

Li et al [20] presented a medical data preservation system based 
on the real-world blockchain platform Ethereum, which provides 
a trustworthy storage solution to ensure the primitiveness and 
verifiability of stored data. Mendes et al [22] presented a Smart 
Ambient Assisted Living environment, which uses blockchain 
technology to enhance data privacy and cognitive security in 
the health care sector. As noted above, out of the 22 included 
papers, 3 (14%) were high-quality papers, 9 (41%) were 
moderate-quality papers, and 10 (45%) were low-quality papers. 

JMIR Med Inform 2022 | vol. 10 | iss. 1 | e17278 | p. 11 

(page number not for citation purposes) 


JMIR MEDICAL INFORMATICS 

Therefore, the conclusions made are convincing based on the 
high or moderate quality of a high percentage of papers. 

Biomedical Research and Education: Clinical Research 

A total of 23% (5/22) of the selected papers in this study 
indicated that blockchain could be applied in biomedical 
research and education fields. Blockchain technology has been 
used extensively in biomedical research and education to 
preserve data privacy, integrity, sharing, record sharing, and 
record keeping, especially in clinical trials [23]. Nugent et al 

[29] presented blockchain smart contracts that prevent 
falsification of data and underreporting of unwanted results of 
clinical research, which enhances trust in the data and clinical 
trials. 
Angeletti et al [27] proposed a proof-of-concept implementation 
of consent traceability in clinical trials using Ethereum to secure 
and ensure unfalsifiable data. Every piece of data or consent 
included in the blockchain system is time-stamped and publicly 
transparent. This is achieved through cryptographic validation. 
All plans, consent, protocols, and possible outcomes can be 
stored on blockchain even before the inception of clinical trials, 
which prevents any corruption and undesirable study results. 

Kleinaki et al [28] presented a blockchain-based notarization 
service that uses smart contracts to seal biomedical database 
queries and the respective results, which ensures data 
transparency. Maslove et al [14] proposed BlockTrial, a 
web-based interface system that allow users to run trial-related 
smart contracts on the Ethereum network in clinical data 
management, thereby enhancing the reliability and transparency 
of complex data in clinical trials. The tamperproof characteristics 
of blockchain prevents the manipulation of data in clinical trials. 

Remote Patient Monitoring 

Remote patient monitoring was another blockchain use case in 
the health care sector. Generally, remote patient monitoring 
includes the gathering of biomedical data from the body and 
mobile devices to enable the monitoring of patient status 
remotely outside of traditional health care environments, such 
as hospitals. 

Liang et al [30] presented a Hyperledger-based implementation 
of blockchain in mHealth that enables data collection and 
sharing between health care stakeholders, ensuring both data 
transparency and accessibility. Saravanan et al [31] proposed 
an end-to-end secured system, a new health care paradigm (ie, 
Secured Mobile-Enabled Assisting Device for Diabetics), 
through smart contracts to facilitate cryptographic security and 
formalized data access in which to monitor diabetes patients. 
The author stated that blockchain was engaged in a 
mobile-enabled assisting device that was developed to monitor 
diabetes patients. Ichikawa et al [16] presented a tamper-resistant 
mHealth system using blockchain technology where a mobile 
device is used to gather EMRs, which are then sent to the 
blockchain-based Hyperledger Fabric network to ensure secure 
management of the data. 

Cichosz et al [25] proposed NEM multi-signature blockchain 
contracts for assisting diabetes patients in monitoring and 
transmitting their vital parameters or data by sensor device to 

https://medinform.jmir.org/2022/1/e17278 

XSL•FO 

RenderX 

Elangovan et al 

a blockchain-based platform where the data are collected, stored, 
and analyzed. In emergency cases, such as abnormal blood 
glucose levels or missing dosages, an alert via a social network, 
such as Facebook or WhatsApp, will be sent to the care provider. 
The data can be communicated continuously by using mobile 
devices as a gateway with blockchain technology, which could 
save patients from any untoward consequences. 

Drug or Pharmaceutical Supply Chains 

Drug or pharmaceutical supply chains are one of the use cases 
of blockchain technology in the health care sector, particularly 
health-related supply chain management. Drug or 
pharmaceutical supply chains involve the introduction of new 
drugs into the market, ensuring the safety and validity of medical 
products sold to end customers [32]. Blockchain has been 
applied in this field to allocate a safe and secure platform and 
to address the most common problems faced in the 
pharmaceutical industry, such as delivery of substandard or 
counterfeit medication, which may have a negative impact on 
patients. 

In this systematic review, only 1 paper out of 22 (5%) presented 
the implementation of a blockchain-based application for 
pharmaceutical supply chain management. Bocek et al [32] 
presented a real-world demonstration and evaluation of 
blockchain technology in the pharmaceutical supply chain, 
where ambient temperature sensors with blockchain technology 
were used to record temperatures at which drugs were stored 
and transported; such temperature measurements were 
immutably kept in a public blockchain for transparent inspection, 
which could also decrease the operational cost in a 
pharmaceutical supply chain. 

Health Insurance Claims 

Health insurance is necessary for everyone to get affordable 
medical treatment. Blockchain’s characteristics, such as 
immutability, decentralization, transparency, and auditability 
of records, can benefit the process of health insurance claims 
in the health care sector. Nevertheless, only 1 paper from the 
22 (5%) selected primary papers focused on this application. 
Zhou et al [33] developed a blockchain-based medical insurance 
storage system that is displayed using the Ethereum blockchain 
platform. The medical insurance data of a patient can be 
encrypted and immutably stored on blockchain, which enhances 
credibility and eliminates the involvement of third parties in 
the management of patients’ health insurance [33]. 

Health Data Analytics 

Only 1 paper out of 22 (5%) presented the use of blockchain 
technology in health data analytics. Blockchain in collaboration 
with other emerging technologies, such as deep-and 
transfer-learning techniques, was used to identify predictive 
analytics of health care data. Kotsiuba et al [34] stated that 
blockchain provides a unique opportunity to overcome the 
problems related to the analysis and security of medical data. 
Using blockchain technology, a decentralized health data 
ecosystem was presented that protected medical data 
confidentiality, produced an effective shared health 
infrastructure, and increased the basis of clinical data collection. 

JMIR Med Inform 2022 | vol. 10 | iss. 1 | e17278 | p. 12 

(page number not for citation purposes) 


JMIR MEDICAL INFORMATICS 

Other Functionalities 

Of the 22 selected primary papers, 1 (5%) study by Talukder et 
al [35] included the relevant research perspective but could not 
be classified under any of the identified uses of blockchain. 
This study presented a blockchain consensus protocol that 
provides accurate medical decisions and reduces the disease 
burden by using Ethereum, based on the proof-of-disease 
consensus protocol. All functionalities of health data 
interoperability, including EMRs, patient health records, and 
health information exchange databases, can be achieved by this 
system. 

Reasons for the Application of Blockchain Technology 
in the Current Health Care System 

Overview 

The main reasons (N=34) for the application or implementation 
of blockchain technology in the health care sector in this study’s 
selected papers were identified and categorized into the 
following groups: data integrity (n=14, 41%), access control 
(n=11, 32%), data logging (n=6, 18%), data versioning (n=2, 
6%), and nonrepudiation (n=1, 3%). 

Data Integrity 

Data integrity is defined as the accuracy and consistency of the 
data or information stored in a system, which acts as an 
important component of information security. Data integrity 
was achieved by using blockchain technology in the health care 
sector. Li et al [20] implemented the blockchain-based platform 
Ethereum to maintain the originality and variability of stored 
data in the system while preserving user privacy. The lifelong 
maintenance of data in blockchain was achieved with the 
proof-of-primitiveness data concept, and the system can validate 
the data where it is identical to the original data. The data can 
be restored and verified through blockchain if it has been 
damaged. 

Kotsiuba et al [34] also presented a decentralized health data 
system using blockchain that secures the collection and 
confidentially of medical or clinical data. In the study by Zhang 
et al [24], data integrity was enhanced by using an 
FHIRChain-based decentralized app, which used blockchain 
technology and digital health identities in remote cancer care 
to validate the participants in a case study of clinical data 
sharing. With the application of public key cryptography, this 
decentralized app improves the trust of participants and enables 
the users to share specific and structured pieces of information, 
rather than an entire document. Thereby, it increases the 
readability of data and flexibility of sharing options. 

Cichosz et al [25] implemented a blockchain-based platform to 
enhance the management and sharing of diabetes data in an easy 
and secure way, which can be achieved by a decentralization 
of blockchain. According to a study by Omar et al [26], the 
integrity, security, privacy, and accountability of data in health 
care are achieved through a privacy-preserving platform using 
blockchain technology. To ensure encryption of patient data 
and pseudonymity, a cryptographic function was used. The 
decentralization of data enabled by the peer-to-peer network in 

https://medinform.jmir.org/2022/1/e17278 

XSL•FO 

RenderX 

Elangovan et al 

blockchain technology helps to reduce cyberattacks and preserve 
the health care data set. 

The proof-of-concept implementation of patient-facing and 
researcher-facing systems using blockchain technology to 
enhance data integrity was demonstrated by Maslove et al [14] 
and Angeletti et al [27]. Maslove et al [14] demonstrated that 
the proof-of-concept implementation using blockchain 
technology in clinical trials secures original personal data, and 
this data would not be shared publicly before an agreement is 
reached. In regard to the use of blockchain technology in clinical 
trials, the clinical research institute can also guarantee that the 
data obtained are authentic and useful. 

Angeletti et al [27] stated that the integrity of the data collected 
in clinical trials was enhanced by the application of blockchain 
technology, specifically blockchain-based smart contracts, which 
act as the foundation to promote trust throughout clinical 
research. The proof-of-concept implementation in clinical 
research enhances the interaction of researchers and patients. 

Blockchain in digital health technologies has also been 
particularly used in mHealth, which includes remote patient 
monitoring to ensure the safe and precise preservation of medical 
information to improve data integrity. Ichikawa et al [16] 
concluded from their study that the usage of blockchain 
technology in mHealth improves data transparency and 
accessibility without the involvement of third parties, due to 
the tamperproof and decentralized characteristics of blockchain 
technology. 

Access Control 

According to Azaria et al [17], access control is defined as an 
individual having full authority in deciding who can access their 
medical data, as well as when and how much of their own 
medical data can be accessed using blockchain technology. 
Access control may lead to patients’ direct involvement in 
controlling their own medical data usage. The distributed ledger, 
which is one of the characteristics of blockchain technology, 
ensures efficient access and retrieval of EMRs [18]. 

Fan et al [19] used a proof of concept with an application 
programming interface using blockchain technology, which 
allows a permission system where each patient is able to view, 
control, and specify who can access their records. 

A study by Cunningham and Ainsworth [18] found that the 
EMRs that included a patient’s full medical history from many 
different hospitals could be easily accessed by the patient using 
a blockchain-based information management system, which 
enhances the outcome of treatment by avoiding the segregation 
of medical data from different hospitals. An access protocol 
was implemented that prevented unauthorized users from 
obtaining any sensitive data or information. 

For access control and the preservation of data, Fan et al [19] 
used the blockchain-based platform concept with NEM 
multi-signature blockchain contracts, which ensured privacy 
control of health data. With this concept, patients are in control 
of their own data and have the power to decide who can access 
their personal data. For instance, an older adult patient could 
share access of their medical data with their adult child. 

JMIR Med Inform 2022 | vol. 10 | iss. 1 | e17278 | p. 13 

(page number not for citation purposes) 


JMIR MEDICAL INFORMATICS 

According to Cichosz et al [25], patients were able to access 
their own medical data through smart blockchain contracts, 
which may lead to secure data sharing. Through BPDS, which 
consists of data access permission implemented by Liu et al 
[21], patients have full control over their medical records or 
data, without jeopardizing their privacy. Furthermore, a user 
can use patient data with permission from the patient. The owner 
of the data in blockchain is capable of revoking his or her access 
permission, in case of a violation of access rules. 

According to Liu et al [21], health records that are centrally 
stored are more vulnerable to cyberattacks. Therefore, 
Nagasubramanian et al [23] presented a keyless signature 
infrastructure (KSI) blockchain technology for securing EHRs 
that ensures authentication and integrity of health records. In a 
KSI blockchain system, the signed data are stored and can be 
operated without a network connection, and no third parties are 
required to preserve data in this system. 

Data access by health care professionals can be achieved through 
smart contracts of blockchain technology with cryptographic 
security. Using blockchain technology, Saravanan et al [31] 
implemented a mobile-based secure health care system that can 
predict a patient’s diabetes status in real time. In case of 
emergency, the doctor can access a patient’s health record and 
prescribe them with a suitable medication dosage using this 
technology system. This blockchain system is used to store data 
related to health care and securely connect with third parties. 

Data Logging 

Data logging is defined as an operation of gathering and storing 
information over a period of time. It allows tracking of all types 
of interactions, such as storage, access, or modification of data, 
files, or applications in a system. Data logging can be achieved 
by the application of blockchain technology in the health care 
sector. 

In clinical trials, Nugent et al [29] demonstrated blockchain 
technology using an Ethereum smart contract to enhance the 
trustworthiness, reliability, and transparency of data 
management. The cryptographic and tamperproof characteristics 
of blockchain prevent all forms of manipulation and enhance 
the data logging of complex clinical trial data management, so 
more informed decisions can be made by medical professionals. 
An mHealth care system using blockchain technology was 
implemented by Liang et al [30] that ensured gathering, sharing, 
and collaboration of data between the health care providers and 
individuals in a secure way. 

Bocek et al [32] stated in their study that the application of 
blockchain technology in pharmaceutical supply chain 
management ensures data logging. They demonstrated the use 
of an Internet of Things sensor device (modum.io AG) that uses 
blockchain technology to ensure the verification of compliance 
with quality control temperature requirements. This device was 
used to monitor and store the temperature of products, enhance 
data immutability, and facilitate public accessibility of 
temperature records of pharmaceutical products, especially 
during transportation. Data provenance was ensured using 
blockchain technology that can prove the origin of products in 
a supply chain. 

https://medinform.jmir.org/2022/1/e17278 

XSL•FO 

RenderX 

Elangovan et al 

Zhou et al [33] stated that blockchain technology acts as a 
tamperproof and decentralized technology to record data, which 
enhances users’ trust in a health insurance system, especially 
with the implementation of a blockchain-based medical 
insurance storage system. For instance, the data about each 
patient’s spending was stored and secured in the blockchain by 
the hospital, which helped the insurance company obtain 
information about the total amount of spending by the patient; 
however, third parties, including the insurance company, cannot 
modify or delete the data and do not have the authority to access 
a patient’s personal medical data. 

Data Versioning 

Data versioning is defined as saving new copies of the data 
when any modification is made to the existing data. This helps 
to keep track of the data and ensure easy retrieval of any specific 
version of the respective stored data in a system. Kleinaki et al 

[28] implemented a blockchain-based notarization service that 
uses smart digital contracts to secure data in the biomedical 
research sector. A study by Mendes et al [22] showed that after 
the retrieval process, retrieved data cannot be modified, which 
ensures the integrity and nonrepudiation of the data. Using 
blockchain technology, data versioning was achieved where 
medical evidence of different versions of data retrieved from a 
biomedical database were securely stored and saved, along with 
content that is continually updated. In this study, this was mostly 
used for decision support in the health care sector. 
Nonrepudiation 

Nonrepudiation guarantees the validity of data in a particular 
health care system, which cannot not be denied by anyone and 
ensures the originality and integrity of data. A study by Angeletti 
et al [27] used blockchain technology to collect, store, and track 
clinical trial consent in a secure, unfalsifiable, and publicly 
verifiable way; this consent was originally time-stamped with 
the application of proof of concept, leading to the nonrepudiation 
of data. The authentication system ensures that the clinical trial 
consent is accessible and transparent for patients, while traceable 
for stakeholders. A single document in open format was used 
and accounted for the whole time-stamped consent collection 
process. This document cannot be corrupted and is considered 
a robust proof of data. 

Study Limitations 

One limitation of this systematic review study was that there 
were no published studies on the safety of blockchain technology 
in health care, so the safety aspect of blockchain technology 
cannot be reviewed. In addition, there were few papers published 
on the negative aspects of implementation of blockchain 
technology in health care. Most studies only published the 
positive aspects, which may have led to bias. 

Future Directions 

Blockchain technology is still a new technology that has not 
been widely implemented in the health care sector. This study 
can be a guide for future research, implementation, and 
evaluation of blockchain technology in this sector. More 
research should be carried out regarding the implementation of 
blockchain technology in real health care environments for 
better understanding, characterization, and evaluation. 

JMIR Med Inform 2022 | vol. 10 | iss. 1 | e17278 | p. 14 

(page number not for citation purposes) 


JMIR MEDICAL INFORMATICS 

Researchers should also focus on carrying out research on the 
safety of implementing blockchain technology in health care. 

Conclusions 

This systematic review has presented an overview of the use 
and characteristics of blockchain technology in the health care 
sector. The findings show that blockchain technology research 
and application in the health care sector is still in its infancy 
but growing rapidly. Blockchain technology has started to 
develop from cryptocurrencies, such as Bitcoin, into various 

Elangovan et al 

general-purpose technologies in many industries, including 
health care. According to the selected papers in this study, 
EMRs, biomedical research and education, remote patient 
monitoring, drug or pharmaceutical supply chains, health 
insurance claims, and health data analytics are the most common 
uses of blockchain technology in health care. The main reasons 
for the application of blockchain technology are to enhance data 

integrity, access control, logging, data versioning, and 
nonrepudiation of patient health records or other health 
information in health care settings. 

Authors' Contributions 

DE, LCM, CSL, FSB, and CST contributed to the study design, data extraction, quality assessment, analysis and interpretation 
of data, and drafting of the manuscript. KWG and SFY contributed to the study design, quality assessment, analysis and 
interpretation of data, and revision of the paper. KSL, ZH, ACI, and MJL contributed to the study design, data extraction, and 
analysis and interpretation of data. All authors proofread and approved the submitted version of the paper. The paper contents 
have not been previously presented elsewhere. All authors have read and approved this manuscript for publication and report no 
financial disclosures. 

Conflicts of Interest 

None declared. 

Multimedia Appendix 1 

Databases and search terms used. 
[DOCX File , 14 KB-Multimedia Appendix 1] 

Multimedia Appendix 2 

PRISMA (Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses) checklist for the systematic review of the use 
of blockchain technology in the health care sector. 
[DOCX File , 29 KB-Multimedia Appendix 2] 

References 

1. Norris AC. Current trends and challenges in health informatics. Health Informatics J 2016 Jul 25;8(4):205-213. [doi: 
10.1177/146045820200800407] 
2. Nguyen Q, Naguib R, Ghani MA, Bali R, Marshall I, Phuong N, et al. An analysis of the healthcare informatics and systems 
in Southeast Asia: A current perspective from seven countries. Int J Electron Healthc 2008;4(2):184. [doi: 
10.1504/ijeh.2008.019792] 
3. Georgiou A. Health informatics and evidence-based medicine -More than a marriage of convenience? Health Informatics 
J 2016 Sep 14;7(3-4):127-130. [doi: 10.1177/146045820100700303] 
4. Ismail NI, Abdullah NH, Shamsuddin A. Adoption of hospital information system (HIS) in Malaysian public hospitals. 
Procedia Soc Behav Sci 2015 Jan;172:336-343. [doi: 10.1016/j.sbspro.2015.01.373] 
5. Peterson K, Deeduvanu R, Kanjamala P, Boles K. A blockchain-based approach to health information exchange networks. 
HealthIT.gov. 2016. URL: https://www.healthit.gov/sites/default/files/12-55-blockchain-based-approach-final.pdf [accessed 
2019-08-08] 
6. Zhang P, White J, Schmidt DC, Lenz G. Applying software patterns to address interoperability challenges in blockchain-based 
healthcare apps. ArXiv Preprint posted online on June 5, 2017 [FREE Full text] 
7. Böhme R, Christin N, Edelman B, Moore T. Bitcoin: Economics, technology, and governance. J Econ Perspect 2015 May 
01;29(2):213-238. [doi: 10.1257/jep.29.2.213] 
8. Dwyer GP. The economics of Bitcoin and similar private digital currencies. J Financ Stab 2015 Apr;17:81-91. [doi: 
10.1016/j.jfs.2014.11.006] 
9. Mettler M. Blockchain technology in healthcare: The revolution starts here. In: Proceedings of the 18th International 
Conference on e-Health Networking, Applications and Services. 2016 Presented at: 18th International Conference on 
e-Health Networking, Applications and Services; Sepember 14-17, 2016; Munich, Germany. [doi: 
10.1109/healthcom.2016.7749510] 
10. Yli-Huumo J, Ko D, Choi S, Park S, Smolander K. Where is current research on blockchain technology?—A systematic 
review. PLoS One 2016;11(10):e0163477 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0163477] [Medline: 27695049] 
https://medinform.jmir.org/2022/1/e17278 JMIR Med Inform 2022 | vol. 10 | iss. 1 | e17278 | p. 15 

(page number not for citation purposes) 

XSL•FO 

RenderX 


JMIR MEDICAL INFORMATICS Elangovan et al 

11. Dybå 
T, Dingsøyr T. Empirical studies of agile software development: A systematic review. Inf Softw Technol 2008 
Aug;50(9-10):833-859. [doi: 10.1016/j.infsof.2008.01.006] 
12. Petersen K, Feldt R, Mujtaba S, Mattsson M. Systematic mapping studies in software engineering. In: Proceedings of the 
12th International Conference on Evaluation and Assessment in Software Engineering. 2008 Presented at: 12th International 
Conference on Evaluation and Assessment in Software Engineering; June 26-27, 2008; Bari, Italy. [doi: 
10.14236/ewic/ease2008.8] 
13. Hölbl M, Kompara M, Kamišalić 
A, Nemec Zlatolas L. A systematic review of the use of blockchain in healthcare. Symmetry 
2018 Oct 10;10(10):470. [doi: 10.3390/sym10100470] 
14. Maslove DM, Klein J, Brohman K, Martin P. Using blockchain technology to manage clinical trials data: A proof-of-concept 
study. JMIR Med Inform 2018 Dec 21;6(4):e11949 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.2196/11949] [Medline: 30578196] 
15. Benchoufi M, Porcher R, Ravaud P. Blockchain protocols in clinical trials: Transparency and traceability of consent. 
F1000Res 2017;6:66 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.12688/f1000research.10531.5] [Medline: 29167732] 
16. Ichikawa D, Kashiyama M, Ueno T. Tamper-resistant mobile health using blockchain technology. JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 
2017 Jul 26;5(7):e111 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.2196/mhealth.7938] [Medline: 28747296] 
17. Azaria A, Ekblaw A, Vieira T, Lippman A. MedRec: Using blockchain for medical data access and permission management. 
In: Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Open and Big Data. 2016 Presented at: 2nd International Conference 
on Open and Big Data; August 22-24, 2016; Vienna, Austria p. 22-24. [doi: 10.1109/obd.2016.11] 
18. Cunningham J, Ainsworth J. Enabling patient control of personal electronic health records through distributed ledger 
technology. Stud Health Technol Inform 2017;245:45-48. [Medline: 29295049] 
19. Fan K, Wang S, Ren Y, Li H, Yang Y. MedBlock: Efficient and secure medical data sharing via blockchain. J Med Syst 
2018 Jun 21;42(8):136. [doi: 10.1007/s10916-018-0993-7] [Medline: 29931655] 
20. Li H, Zhu L, Shen M, Gao F, Tao X, Liu S. Blockchain-based data preservation system for medical data. J Med Syst 2018 
Jun 28;42(8):141. [doi: 10.1007/s10916-018-0997-3] [Medline: 29956058] 
21. Liu J, Li X, Ye L, Zhang H, Du X, Guizani M. BPDS: A blockchain based privacy-preserving data sharing for electronic 
medical records. In: Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE Global Communications Conference. 2018 Presented at: 2018 IEEE 
Global Communications Conference; December 9-13, 2018; Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates p. 9-13. [doi: 
10.1109/glocom.2018.8647713] 
22. Mendes D, Rodrigues IP, Fonseca C, Lopes MJ, García-Alonso JM, Berrocal J. Anonymized distributed PHR using 
blockchain for openness and non-repudiation guarantee. Stud Health Technol Inform 2018;255:170-174. [Medline: 30306930] 
23. Nagasubramanian G, Sakthivel RK, Patan R, Gandomi AH, Sankayya M, Balusamy B. Securing e-health records using 
keyless signature infrastructure blockchain technology in the cloud. Neural Comput Appl 2018 Nov 30;32(3):639-647. 
[doi: 10.1007/s00521-018-3915-1] 
24. Zhang P, White J, Schmidt DC, Lenz G, Rosenbloom ST. FHIRChain: Applying blockchain to securely and scalably share 
clinical data. Comput Struct Biotechnol J 2018;16:267-278 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1016/j.csbj.2018.07.004] [Medline: 
30108685] 
25. Cichosz SL, Stausholm MN, Kronborg T, Vestergaard P, Hejlesen O. How to use blockchain for diabetes health care data 
and access management: An operational concept. J Diabetes Sci Technol 2019 Mar;13(2):248-253 [FREE Full text] [doi: 
10.1177/1932296818790281] [Medline: 30047789] 
26. Omar AA, Bhuiyan MZA, Basu A, Kiyomoto S, Rahman MS. Privacy-friendly platform for healthcare data in cloud based 
on blockchain environment. Future Gener Comput Syst 2019 Jun;95:511-521. [doi: 10.1016/j.future.2018.12.044] 
27. Angeletti F, Chatzigiannakis I, Vitaletti A. The role of blockchain and IoT in recruiting participants for digital clinical 
trials. In: Proceedings of the 25th International Conference on Software, Telecommunications and Computer Networks. 
2017 Presented at: 25th International Conference on Software, Telecommunications and Computer Networks; September 
21-23, 2017; Split, Croatia. [doi: 10.23919/SOFTCOM.2017.8115590] 
28. Kleinaki A, Mytis-Gkometh P, Drosatos G, Efraimidis PS, Kaldoudi E. A blockchain-based notarization service for 
biomedical knowledge retrieval. Comput Struct Biotechnol J 2018;16:288-297 [FREE Full text] [doi: 
10.1016/j.csbj.2018.08.002] [Medline: 30181840] 
29. Nugent T, Upton D, Cimpoesu M. Improving data transparency in clinical trials using blockchain smart contracts. F1000Res 
2016;5:2541 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.12688/f1000research.9756.1] [Medline: 28357041] 
30. Liang X, Zhao J, Shetty S, Liu J, Li D. Integrating blockchain for data sharing and collaboration in mobile healthcare 
applications. In: Proceedings of the 28th Annual International Symposium on Personal, Indoor, and Mobile Radio 
Communications. 2017 Presented at: 28th Annual International Symposium on Personal, Indoor, and Mobile Radio 
Communications; October 8-13, 2017; Montreal, QC. [doi: 10.1109/PIMRC.2017.8292361] 
31. Saravanan M, Shubha R, Mary A. SMEAD: A secured mobile enabled assisting device for diabetics monitoring. In: 
Proceedings of the 11th IEEE International Conference on Advanced Networks and Telecommunications Systems. 2018 
Presented at: 11th IEEE International Conference on Advanced Networks and Telecommunications Systems; December 
17-20, 2017; Bhubaneswar, India. [doi: 10.1109/ants.2017.8384099] 
32. Bocek T, Rodrigues B, Strasser T, Stiller B. Blockchains everywhere -A use-case of blockchains in the pharma supply-chain. 
In: Proceedings of the IFIP/IEEE Symposium on Integrated Network and Service Management. 2017 Presented at: IFIP/IEEE 
https://medinform.jmir.org/2022/1/e17278 JMIR Med Inform 2022 | vol. 10 | iss. 1 | e17278 | p. 16 

(page number not for citation purposes) 

XSL•FO 

RenderX 


JMIR MEDICAL INFORMATICS Elangovan et al 

Symposium on Integrated Network and Service Management; May 8-12, 2017; Lisbon, Portugal. [doi: 
10.23919/inm.2017.7987376] 

33. Zhou L, Wang L, Sun Y. MIStore: A blockchain-based medical insurance storage system. J Med Syst 2018 Jul 02;42(8):149 
[FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1007/s10916-018-0996-4] [Medline: 29968202] 
34. Kotsiuba I, Velvkzhanin A, Yanovich Y, Bandurova I, Dyachenko Y, Zhygulin V. Decentralized e-Health architecture for 
boosting healthcare analytics. In: Proceedings of the 2nd World Conference on Smart Trends in Systems, Security and 
Sustainability. 2019 Presented at: 2nd World Conference on Smart Trends in Systems, Security and Sustainability; October 
30-31, 2018; London, UK. [doi: 10.1109/worlds4.2018.8611621] 
35. Talukder A, Chaitanya M, Arnold D, Sakurai K. Proof of disease: A blockchain consensus protocol for accurate medical 
decisions and reducing the disease burden. In: Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE SmartWorld, Ubiquitous Intelligence & 
Computing, Advanced & Trusted Computing, Scalable Computing & Communications, Cloud & Big Data Computing, 
Internet of People and Smart City Innovations. 2018 Presented at: 2018 IEEE SmartWorld, Ubiquitous Intelligence & 
Computing, Advanced & Trusted Computing, Scalable Computing & Communications, Cloud & Big Data Computing, 
Internet of People and Smart City Innovations; October 7-11, 2018; Guangzhou, China. [doi: 10.1109/smartworld.2018.00079] 
Abbreviations 
BPDS: blockchain-based privacy-preserving data sharing 
EHR: electronic health record 
EMR: electronic medical record 
FHIR: Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resources 
HI: health informatics 
HIS: hospital information system 
IT: information technology 
KSI: keyless signature infrastructure 
MeSH: Medical Subject Headings 
mHealth: mobile health 
MIT: Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
NEM: New Economy Movement 
PRISMA: Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses 
Q1: question 1 
Q2: question 2 
Q3: question 3 
Q4: question 4 

Edited by G Eysenbach; submitted 02.12.19; peer-reviewed by F Riaz, W Zhang, T Ueno, C Esposito; comments to author 24.04.20; 
revised version received 12.11.20; accepted 28.09.21; published 20.01.22 
Please cite as: 
Elangovan D, Long CS, Bakrin FS, Tan CS, Goh KW, Yeoh SF, Loy MJ, Hussain Z, Lee KS, Idris AC, Ming LC 
The Use of Blockchain Technology in the Health Care Sector: Systematic Review 
JMIR Med Inform 2022;10(1):e17278 
URL: https://medinform.jmir.org/2022/1/e17278 
doi: 10.2196/17278 
PMID: 
©Deepa Elangovan, Chiau Soon Long, Faizah Safina Bakrin, Ching Siang Tan, Khang Wen Goh, Siang Fei Yeoh, Mei Jun Loy, 
Zahid Hussain, Kah Seng Lee, Azam Che Idris, Long Chiau Ming. Originally published in JMIR Medical Informatics 
(https://medinform.jmir.org), 20.01.2022. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons 
Attribution License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction 
in any medium, provided the original work, first published in JMIR Medical Informatics, is properly cited. The complete 
bibliographic information, a link to the original publication on https://medinform.jmir.org/, as well as this copyright and license 
information must be included. 

https://medinform.jmir.org/2022/1/e17278 JMIR Med Inform 2022 | vol. 10 | iss. 1 | e17278 | p. 17 

(page number not for citation purposes) 

XSL•FO 

RenderX 


